Chunk 1
Περὶ μὲν τῆς τῶν ἁπλῶν φαρμάκων δυνάμεως εἴρηται δι’ ἑτέρας πραγματείας ὅτι χρὴ γινώσκειν ἑκάστου τὴν δύναμιν, οὐ κατὰ γένος μόνον, ὡς ἔγραψάν τινες, ἤτοι θερμαίνειν ἢ ψύχειν ἢ ξηραίνειν ἢ ὑγραίνειν εἰπόντες, ἀλλὰ διωρισμένως τε καὶ διηρθρωμένως, ἐκ τίνος ἐστὶ τάξεως, ὡς ἡμεῖς ἐδηλώσαμεν. ἔνια μὲν γὰρ φάρμακα παντάπασιν ἀμυδρῶς ἐργάζεται τῶν εἰρημένων ἕκαστον, ἔνια δὲ σαφῶς, ἔνια δὲ ἰσχυρῶς, ὥσπερ ἄλλα τελέως. οὔκουν αὐταρκὲς ἐπίστασθαι θερμαίνειν ἢ ψύχειν τόδε τὸ φάρμακον, ἀλλὰ καὶ μέχρι πόσου θερμαίνει καὶ ψύχει προσδιορίσασθαι χρή. θερμαίνουσι γὰρ αἱ ῥητίναι πᾶσαι καὶ τοῦτο κοινὸν αὐταῖς, ἀλλὰ τὸ μᾶλλον καὶ ἧττον οὐκ ὀλίγον ἐν τῇ θερμότητι κέκτηνται. θερμαίνουσι δὲ καὶ ὀποὶ πολλοὶ, διαφέροντες ἀλλήλων οὐ σμικρὰν διαφορὰν ἐν τῷ μᾶλλόν τε καὶ ἧττον. εἰ γὰρ παραβάλλοις ὀπὸν πάνακος τῷ Κυρηναίῳ καὶ Μηδικῷ, δόξει σοι τοῦτο μηδὲν ὡς πρὸς ἐκείνους εἶναι. καὶ τί δεῖ πόῤῥω τὸν λόγον ἀπάγειν, αὐτῶν οἷς ὁσημέραι προσφερόμεθα τῆς διαφορᾶς ἀναμνῆσαι δυναμένους; ἄνηθον γοῦν καὶ πήγανον καὶ κρόμμυον θερμαίνοντα πάντα πολὺ διενήνοχεν ἀλλήλων, ὥστε καὶ κατὰ τὰς θεραπείας τῷ μὲν ἱκανῶς ἐψυγμένῳ μορίῳ τὸ θερμαῖνον ἱκανῶς προσοίσομεν φάρμακον, τῷ δὲ βραχὺ τοῦ κατὰ φύσιν ἐξηλλαγμένῳ τὸ μετρίως θερμαῖνον, ὥσπερ γε καὶ τῷ πάνυ κατεψυγμένῳ τὸ σφοδρότατα θερμαῖνον. εἰκότως οὖν ἡμεῖς ἐποιησάμεθα τέσσαρας τάξεις ἐν τοῖς θερμαίνουσι, διορισάμενοι τῶν ἐπ’ ὀλίγον θερμαινόντων τά τε σαφῶς τοῦτο δρῶντα καὶ τὰ πάνυ θερμαίνοντα καὶ τὰ σφόδρα μετὰ τοῦ καίειν. 

Regarding the properties of simple drugs, in another work it has been stated that one must know the capacity of each, not only according to kind – as some have written, saying [simply] that they warm, cool, dry, or moist – but, as we have shown, specifically and distinctly by which degree. For some of the remedies mentioned act rather imperceptibly, some clearly, some strongly, while others fully. One must not [only] know whether that specific drug warms or cools sufficiently but must also specify to what extent it warms or cools. For all resins warm and this is common to [all of] them, but they differ significantly in terms of heat. Plant juices are warming as well, and they [too] differ from each other not slightly in terms of having more or less heating capacity. For if you compare the juice of panax to the juice of the Cyrenaic silphium and the Median silphium, to you it will seem nothing like the other two. And how far do we need to take the discussion when we can recall the difference of the substances that we use daily? Dill, rue, and onion, all of which are warming, differ greatly from each other, so that, as a therapy, we will use the sufficiently warm remedy on the part that is sufficiently cooled, while we will use the sufficiently warming remedy on the part which has changed quickly from its natural state, as we would use the most strongly warming remedy on a part which has become completely cold. In fact, we have reasonably created four degrees within warming substances, distinguishing those that warm slightly, those that do it clearly, those that warm completely, and those that warm strongly to the point of burning. 

Chunk 2
ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἄν τις αὐτὸν ἴσως ἐν τούτῳ μέμψαιτο τοῖς ἤδη γεγυμνασμένοις κατὰ τὴν ἰατρικὴν τέχνην, οὐκ ἰδιώταις γράφοντα. τὸ δὲ μὴ προστιθέναι τὰς ἐπαγγελίας ἢ τὰς καθόλου δυνάμεις οὐ σμικρὸν ἁμάρτημα. τί γὰρ καὶ φήσει τις ἀπολογούμενος ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ; τάχ’ ἴσως ὅτι τοῖς ἐπισταμένοις τὰς τῶν ἁπλῶν φαρμάκων δυνάμεις γέγραπται ταῦτα. καὶ μὴν οὐδεὶς ἐκείνων Ἀνδρομάχου δεῖται, δυνάμενός γε καὶ αὐτὸς ὁμοίως συντιθέναι. 16. [Λευκὴ Ἥρα πρὸς τοὺς ὑδροφόβους.] Πάλιν οὖν ἐπὶ τὸν Ἥραν ἀφικόμεθα, γράφοντα μετὰ τὴν Ἀτταλικὴν ἔμπλαστρον ἑτέραν λευκὴν, αὐτοῖς ὀνόμασι τοῖσδε· λευκὴ πρὸς τοὺς λυσσοδήκτους. ποιεῖ δ’ ἀκριβῶς καὶ πρὸς τοὺς ὑδροφόβους. ῥύεται γὰρ εὐθὺς τοῦ κινδύνου ἐπιτεθεῖσα τῷ τραύματι. τοῖς μέντοι κεκρατημένοις ἄγαν καὶ καταπότιον ὅσον καρύου Ποντικοῦ ἐξ αὐτῆς ποιήσαντα διδόναι καὶ ﻿ τοῦτο ποιεῖν ἐφ’ ἡμέρας μ΄. μεταβάλλει μέντοι τὴν χρόαν ἐπὶ τῶν σπληνῶν καὶ γίνεται μέλαινα. ποιεῖ δὲ καὶ πρὸς ἀνθρωπόδηκτα, κυνόδηκτα, ἀποσύρματα, δυσκατούλωτα, αἴρει καὶ ὑπώπια κεράτιον α΄ καὶ τραύματα κολλᾷ. ποιεῖ καὶ πρὸς φύματα καὶ ῥαγάδας. ἔστι δὲ καὶ πεσσὸς μαλακτικός. δεῖ μέντοι παρὰ μίαν ἡμέραν λύειν καὶ ἀποσπογγίζειν τὴν ἐπιγινομένην τοῖς ἕλκεσι μελανίαν. καὶ τοῦτο ποιεῖν, ἕως ἂν μηκέτι φαίνηται ἡ μελανία. ἡ αὐτὴ καὶ κατουλωτική ἐστι καὶ πρὸς πάντα ἀγαθή. ταῦτα προειπὼν Ἥρας ἐφεξῆς ἔγραψε τὴν συμμετρίαν τῆς ἐμπλάστρου κατὰ τήνδε τὴν λέξιν. λευκή. ♃ κηροῦ λευκοῦ Ποντικοῦ λίτρας β΄. λιθαργύρου χρυσίτιδος λίτραν α΄. ψιμυθίου λίτραν α΄. σμύρνης οὐγγίας β΄. μυελοῦ ἐλαφείου οὐγγίας β΄.

However, nobody would criticise him in the same way for writing to those already trained in medical practice and not to the laymen. But omitting the therapeutic indication or the general capacities is not a minor mistake. For what will somebody say in his defense? Perhaps that these things have been written for those who know the capacities of simple drugs. And surely none of them need Andromachus, because they can indeed compound equally well on their own. 16. White plaster by Heras for people affected by hydrophobia. So we go back to Heras, who, after the Attalic plaster, wrote another white one, in these exact words: ‘white plaster for people bitten by a rabid dog’; but then he is more precise and adds, ‘for people affected by hydrophobia’, for it protects from the risk [of becoming hydrophobic] if applied immediately on the injury. However, he also recommends giving those overcome [by the disease] a small pill, the size of a Pontic nut,, which one can make from the plaster, and doing this for 40 days. However, this pill will change colour in case of spleen affections, and it will become black. And it works for man bites, dog bites, abrasions, and heard-to-cicatrise wounds; one carat also heals black eyes and closes wounds. It also works for phymata [i.e. swellings of the glands] and rhagades. A pessary [made from it] is also softening. Yet one must release [the bandage] after one day and wipe off with a sponge the black mark that has formed in the wound, and one must do this until the black mark is no longer visible. The same plaster is also cicatrising and good for everything. Having said this, Heras wrote the proportion of the plaster in these words. White plaster. Pontic white wax, 2 librae. Chrysitis litharge, one libra. White lead, one libra. Myrrh, 2 unciae. Stag marrow, 2 unciae. 

Chunk 3
ἀλλὰ περὶ μὲν τούτων καὶ αὖθις εἰρήσεται, περὶ δὲ τῶν ἰσχυρῶς ῥυπτόντων φαρμάκων ἐφεξῆς ἐρῶ. 5. [Περὶ τῶν ἰσχυρῶς ῥυπτόντων φαρμάκων.] Ὅτι μὲν ἐκ τοῦ γένους ἐστὶ ταῦτα τῶν προειρημένων, ὅσα τῷ μετρίως ῥύπτειν ἕλκεσι κοίλοις, καθαροῖς, ἀπεριστάτοις προσεφέρετο μηδ’ ὅλως δάκνοντα, λέλεκται πρόσθεν. ἐπιτεταμένην δὲ τὴν ῥυπτικὴν δύναμιν ἔχει τὰ τὸν πολὺν ἀφαιροῦντα ῥύπον, ὥστ’ ἔνια τῶν εἰρημένων φαρμάκων χλωρῶν ἑνὶ μόνῳ τῶν ἁπλῶς σαρκωτικῶν διαφέρει τῷ πλήθει τοῦ ἰοῦ. τινὰ δὲ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων, ὅσα ῥύπτει σφοδρῶς μίξει, καθάπερ ἴσις ὀνομαζομένη καὶ τὸ τοῦ Μαχαιρίωνος, ᾧ ἡμεῖς χρώμεθα συνήθως, ἐλαιώδει καλουμένῳ διὰ τὴν χρῆσιν. ἔνθα γὰρ ἡμῖν πρόκειται σαρκῶσαι κόλπον, ἐλαίῳ πολλῷ τήκοντες ἐγχέομεν αὐτὸ δι’ εὐθυτρήτου κέρατος, ἐν τρόπῳ κλυστῆρος ὑείᾳ κύστει συνημμένου, χρώμεθα καὶ τοῖς καλουμένοις πυουλκοῖς ἐπ’ αὐτοῦ· καὶ γὰρ καὶ τούτων, ὅσοις εὐρύτερόν ἐστι τὸ τρῆμα, χρήσιμοι πρὸς τὴν τοιαύτην ὑπηρεσίαν εἰσί. πρόδηλον δ’ ὅτι τὸν μὲν ῥυπαρὸν κόλπον ἐργαζόμεθα καθαρὸν, ἀκρατέστερον χρώμενοι τῷ φαρμάκῳ, τουτέστιν ἐλάττονι μιγνύντες ἐλαίῳ, τὸν δὲ καθαρὸν ἐπὶ πλέον ὑγρασμένῳ δι’ ἐλαίου δαψιλεστέρου μίξεως. εἰ μὲν οὖν ὑποψία τις εἴη μεμιγμένης φλεγμονῆς ἔτι βραχείας τῷ κόλπῳ, διὰ ῥοδίνου πάντως τηκέσθω τὸ φάρμακον. εἰ δ’ ἀφλέγμαντος εἴη, δι’ ἐλαίου, κᾂν ἀδήκτως ἀνέχηται τῆς τοῦ παλαιοῦ μίξεως, ἐκείνῳ διατηκέσθω τὸ φάρμακον. ἐπιτήδειον δὲ εἰς τὴν τοιαύτην χρῆσίν ἐστιν οὐ τοῦτο μόνον τὸ φάρμακον, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ τοῦ Μαχαιρίωνος καὶ ἡ ἴσις, ὅσα τ’ ἄλλα γεγράφασιν οἱ πρὸ ἐμοῦ μετὰ κηρωτῆς μιγνύμενα σαρκωτικὰ γίγνεσθαι κοίλων ἑλκῶν.

But I will talk again about these things, while next I will talk about drugs that strongly cleanse. 5. About strongly cleansing drugs. It has been said earlier that the aforementioned drugs are of the kind applied to wounds that are hollow, clean, and with no complications, since they cleanse moderately and do not bite at all. Drugs that completely remove the dirt have the cleansing capacity increased so that some of the green remedies mentioned differ from the remedies that are simply enfleshing in terms of one parameter only: the quantity of the verdigris. Among others are those that strongly cleanse in combination, like the remedy called ‘Isis’ and the remedy by Machairion – which we habitually employ – called ‘oily’ because of its use. For when we are presented with a fistula that needs to be enfleshed, after dissolving the remedy in abundant oil, we pour it into the fistula with a horn bored straight through, in the way we would use a syringe connected to a pig bladder. We also use the tools called pyulci on the fistula, and in particular those with the wider hole are useful for such a purpose. It is clear that we make the dirty fistula clean using the remedy in a weaker form – that is, mixing it with less oil – whereas we make the fistula cleaner with a remedy moistened by mixing more abundant oil. If there were a suspected inflammation – still small – associated with the fistula, the remedy should be completely dissolved in rose oil. If the fistula were not inflamed, the remedy should be dissolved in olive oil; and, if the person tolerates the addition of old olive oil without feeling a biting sensation, the remedy should be dissolved completely in that oil. Not only this remedy is suitable for such a use but also the one by Machairion, the Isis, and the others that my predecessors have written to be enfleshing for hollow wounds when mixed with a cerate. 

Chunk 4
μέσης δ’ ὕλης ἐν αὐτοῖς ἐστι τὰ πικρὰ ταῖς ποιότησι, τῶν μὲν πάνυ λεπτομερῶν ἀπολειπόμενα, παχυμερὲς δ’ οὐδὲν ἔχοντα. τινὰ δ’ αὐτῶν ἀποκεχώρηκε βραχὺ τῶν μέσων, τὰ μὲν ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ θερμαίνειν, τὰ δὲ ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ ψύχειν, ὧν ἁπάντων τὰς ὕλας ἐν τῇ περὶ τῶν ἁπλῶν φαρμάκων πραγματείᾳ διῆλθον, ὥσπερ γε καὶ τῶν ἀκροδρύων, ἐν οἷς ἐστι τὰ ἀμύγδαλα τὰ πικρὰ καὶ τὰ πιστάκια. τῆς δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν φυτῶν ὕλης οὐ μέμνημαι κατὰ τὸ παρὸν, ἀνελθεῖν γὰρ ἐπὶ τὴν ἀρχὴν βούλομαι καὶ διηγήσασθαι, πότε καὶ πῶς ἐχρησάμην ἑκάστῳ τῶν ἐπινοηθέντων. ἐκ τούτου γὰρ οἶμαι τοὺς εὐφυεῖς τῶν νέων προτραπήσεσθαι,γνῶναι τὴν ὕλην τῶν φαρμάκων αὐτόπτας αὐτῆς γενομένους οὐχ ἅπαξ ἤ δὶς, ἀλλὰ πολλάκις. ἡ γὰρ τῶν αἰσθητῶν διάγνωσις ἐκ συνεχοῦς θέας ἀκριβοῦται, καὶ τούτου μέγιστόν ἐστι τεκμήριον ἡ τῶν ἀπαραλλάκτων μὲν ἡμῖν εἶναι δοκούντων διδύμων, οὐκ ἀπαραλλάκτων δὲ τοῖς συνήθεσι μὴ παραδραμεῖν. τὴν μὲν οὖν ἀπό τε βοτανῶν καὶ θάμνων καὶ δένδρων ὕλην ἄριστόν ἐστι πρὶν ἐξαιρεθῆναι τῆς γῆς σκοπεῖσθαι κατὰ τὰς ἐγκαρπώσεις, μελλούσας τε καὶ ἀρχομένας καὶ προϊούσας καὶ ἀκμαζούσας. αὕτη γὰρ ἡ συνεχὴς αὐτῶν θέα διδάξει σε πηνίκα μάλιστα καλῶς ἄν τις αὐτὰ λαμβάνων καὶ ἐν οἴκοις ξηροῖς τιθέμενος φυλάττοι, μήθ’ ὑπ’ ἀκτίνων ἡλιακῶν ἐξοπτώμενα μήτε ὑπὸ νοτίδος ἐκ τῆς ὀροφῆς ἢ τοίχων ὑγραινόμενα. γένοιτο δ’ ἂν τοῦτο τῶν οἴκων μήτε καταγείων ὄντων μήτε προσχόρων, μήθ’ ὑπὸ κεράμων πρὸς μεσημβρίαν μέντοι τὰς θυρίδας ἐστραμμένας ἐχόντων.

Among the substances in the middle category of matter, in terms of quality, are the bitter ones, which depart completely from those that are fine in composition, yet they have no thickness in composition. Some of them are slightly far from the middle substances in terms of warming and cooling – I discussed the matter of them all in detail in my work on simple remedies, as I did for the substance of the fruits, among which are bitter almonds and pistachios. At present I am not mentioning the matter of plants, because I want to go back to the start and set out in detail when and how we use each of the remedies we devised. In fact, I believe that from this the naturally gifted youths will be driven to learn  the matter of drugs by seeing it for themselves not once or twice, but repeatedly. For the recognition of sensations is perfected through continuous observations, and the best proof of this is that we recognise as indistinguishable things that are double, yet the ability to recognise them as not indistinguishable will not escape with habitual observations. The best thing is to observe the matter of plants, shrubs, and trees before they are removed from the ground, and in relation to their fruitfulness: when they are about to produce fruits, when they start producing, during their ongoing production, and at their peak. For continuous observation of these things will teach you when one should most properly collect the substances and preserve them by storing them in dry rooms, so that they are neither roasted by the sunbeams nor dampened by humidity from the roof or the walls. This could be achieved if the rooms are neither on the ground floor nor next to the outer wall, or if they are under the roof with no windows facing south. 

Chunk 5
τὸ παχυμερὲς γὰρ οὐδὲν ὀνίνησι τοὺς νευροτρώτους δεομένους φαρμάκων, ὡς εἴρηται, λεπτομερῶν. ἀναλαμβανέσθω δὲ κηρωτοειδεῖ τινι τὸ διατμηθέν τε καὶ λειωθὲν συμμετρίᾳ τὴν ἀναλογίαν ἐχούσῃ τὴν προειρημένην κατὰ τὸ εὐφόρβιον. ὅσον γὰρ ἐν ἐκείνῳ τοῦ διετοῦς εὐφορβίου, τοσοῦτον ἐν τούτοις δικτάμνου τε καὶ μήου καὶ ἀκόρου βλητέον, ὅσα τ’ ἄλλα τούτοις ὁμοίως ἐστὶ θερμὰ γευομένοις. ὅσον δ’ ἐν ἐκείνοις ἐστὶ τοῦ τριετοῦς, τοσοῦτον ἐν τούτοις ἀριστολοχίας, ἴρεώς τε καὶ δρακοντίου καὶ γεντιανῆς, ὅσα τ’ ἄλλα παραπλησίως τοῖσδε πικρά ἐστιν. 8. [Περὶ τῶν πολυτελῶν σκευασιῶν τῶν πρὸς τοὺς νευροτρώτους φαρμάκων.] Οὐκ ἄχρηστον ἂν εἴη καὶ τὰ τοιαῦτα ἐπίστασθαι φάρμακα. χρεία γὰρ αὐτῶν ποτε γίγνεται σπανιώτερον, ὥσπερ τῶν εὐτελῶν πολλάκις. ὅπου γάρ τις οὐ πλείους ἔχων πεντακοσίων μυριάδων ἀνὴρ φιλοφάρμακός τε καὶ φιλίατρος οὐδενὶ τῶν εὐτελῶν ἠξίου χρῆσθαι, πολὺ μᾶλλον ἤτοι πλούσιός τις ἢ καὶ μόναρχος, εὐῶδές τε ἅμα καὶ πολλοῦ σκευαζόμενον ἀργυρίου βουληθήσεται τοιοῦτον ἔχειν φάρμακον. τοῦ δὲ ἱστορηθέντος μοι πλουσίου κατὰ τὸ πρῶτον τῶν περὶ τῆς διὰ τῶν σφυγμῶν προγνώσεως μέμνημαι χωρὶς ὀνόματος, ὥσπερ καὶ νῦν, ὁποῖός τις ἦν, ἐκ δυοῖν αὐτοῦ τοιῶνδε μαθήσῃ πράξεων. ἕλκος οἰκέτου κακόηθες ἐπειρᾶτο θεραπεύειν αὐτός. ὡς δὲ οὐδὲν ἤνυσεν, ἐνεχείρισεν ἐμοὶ τὸν ἄνθρωπον, ἰδών τε θεραπευθέντα τοῦ φαρμάκου τὴν γραφὴν ᾔτει μὴ γιγνώσκων πολλὰς μὲν εἶναι διαφορὰς τῶν κακοήθων ἑλκῶν, πολλὰς δὲ τῶν φαρμάκων, ἀλλ’ οἰόμενος ἓν φάρμακον δύνασθαι θεραπεύειν ἅπαντα.

A thick composition does not benefit people with nerve injuries, who, as noted, require remedies of fine composition. The drug—cut and finely pounded—must be compounded with something cerate-like in the proportion indicated above for the euphorbium resin. For one must add to these formulations the same amount of dictamus, bald money,  and yellow flag as the quantity of two-year-old euphorbium resin added to that formulation, as well as equal amounts of other drugs that are likewise warming to the taste. And whatever amount of three-year-old euphorbium resin was in those remedies, the same amount of aristolochia, iris, green dragon, and gentian must be added to these, as well as comparable quantities of other drugs that are nearly as bitter. 8. On the preparation of very expensive formulations of remedies for people with nerve injuries. It would not be useless to know these remedies as well: for they are used at times [although] rather infrequently , just as the cheap ones are used often. For whenever somebody with no more than 5 million, who has a passion for drugs and for the art of medicine, believes that no cheap remedy is worth using, all the more will a wealthy person or even a king wish to have a drug which is fragrant and expensively produced. I recall the man I examined in the first book of my work on the diagnosis of the pulse (I omitted his name, just as I do now): you will understand what kind of man he was from these two episodes about him. He himself tried to cure a hard-to-heal wound of a household slave. Having achieved nothing, he entrusted the servant to me; when he saw that he was cured, he asked me for the recipe, unaware that there are many differences among hard-to-heal wounds, as there are in the remedies, but assuming that one remedy could cure all. 

Chunk 6
καὶ τὸ πάχος δὲ αὐτοῦ τοῦ δεδολωμένου συνεχὲς οὐκ ἔστιν, οὐδ’ ὁμοιομερὲς, ὥσπερ τὸ τοῦ μὴ δολωθέντος, ἀλλὰ καὶ πρὸς τῷ πυθμένι τοῦ ἀγγείου παχύτερον γίγνεται. τὸ δ’ ἐπιπολῆς λεπτότερον, ὅθεν καὶ διακινοῦσιν αὐτὸ, διδόντες τοῖς ὠνουμένοις οἱ παραποιήσαντες. ἀλλὰ κᾂν ἀληθῶς ᾖ τὸ ἔλαιον ἄνευ τῆς τοιαύτης πανουργίας αὐτοφυὲς, ὄνομα μὲν ἔχει τοῦτο δὴ τὸ παλαιὸν, ἡ δύναμις δ’ οὐκ ἐγγύς ἐστι τῷ τριετεῖ πρὸς τὸ τριακονταετὲς ἢ τῷ τετραετεῖ πρὸς τὸ πεντηκονταετές. ἐπικτᾶται μὲν γάρ τινα δῆξιν ἐν τῷ χρόνῳ τό τε ἔλαιον καὶ τὸ στέαρ, ὅταν παλαιωθῇ. ἀλλὰ αὕτη μὲν μεγίστη, μεγίστη δὲ ἡ κατὰ δύναμιν ἐξαλλαγή. διαφορικώτατα γάρ ἐστι τό τε ἔλαιον καὶ τὸ στέαρ, ὅταν παλαιωθῇ. καὶ τούτου πειραθεὶς ἐγὼ διὰ τὸ κατά τινα τύχην ἔλαιόν τε καὶ στέαρ ἔχειν παλαιότατον, τοῦ πατρὸς ἐκ πολλοῦ φυλάττοντος αὐτὰ, αὐτὸς πάλιν ἄμφω κατέθηκα δαψιλῆ, κομιδῇ νέος ὢν, ὅπως ἔχοιμι χρονίζουσιν αὐτοῖς χρῆσθαι μετὰ τὸ καταναλῶσαι τὰ τοῦ πατρός. ἀλλὰ καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα πάλιν οὐκ ὀλιγάκις ἀπεθέμην ἀμφότερα παλαιωθησόμενα. καὶ νῦν ἐστί μοι τοσοῦτον πλῆθος αὐτῶν, ὡς ἐξαρκέσαι κᾂν ἑκατὸν ἔτη ζήσω. καὶ τοίνυν τὸ προκείμενον ἐν τῷ λόγῳ φάρμακον ἔλαιόν τε καὶ στέαρ ἐτῶν τεσσαράκοντα λαβὸν ἀεὶ παρ’ ἐμοὶ τὰ κακοηθέστατα τῶν πολυχρονίων ἑλκῶν ὠφέλησε. ἐλπίδος μειζόνως.

The thickness of the adulterated form itself is not constant, nor homogenous like the thickness of the unadulterated one, but it increases towards the bottom of the container. It is the thinner fraction on the top, whence they remove it, that the counterfeiters take and give to the buyers. Nevertheless, in reality, even when the oil is in its natural state without such adulteration, it is called ‘old’, yet 3-year-old oil has a capacity far different from 30-year-old oil, and 4-year-old oil has a capacity far different from for 50-year-old oil. For oil and fat in time acquire some bite when they are aged; and the greater the bite, the greater the change in capacity; so oil and fat are very dispersing when they are aged. I made proof of this because I happened to have some rather old oil and fat, which my father had been keeping for a long time. When I was quite young, I set aside a substantial quantity of both again, so I could use them later, once I ran out of my father’s supply. Thereafter, too, we not infrequently put both away to age; and now I have so much of them that they would be enough even if I were to live a hundred years. Therefore, in my household the remedy presented in the passage, with 40-year-old oil and fat, has always been more helpful than expected against the most hard-to-heal chronic wounds.

Chunk 7
ἡ δὲ ἀμπελῖτις γῆ ξηραίνει τε καὶ διαφορεῖ μηδὲν ἔχουσα δριμὺ σαφῶς. καὶ διὰ τοῦτο τοῖς κακοήθεσιν ἕλκεσιν ἐπιτήδειός ἐστιν, εἰ καὶ μόνην αὐτὴν λειώσας ἐπιπάττοις. ἡ χαλβάνη δὲ καὶ αὐτὴ τῷ πεπτική τε εἶναι καὶ μαλακτικὴ καὶ παρηγορική τε καὶ ἀνώδυνος ἐμίχθη κατὰ τὴν προκειμένην σύνθεσιν, ἔχοντος μὲν καὶ τοῦ λιβανωτοῦ τὰς αὐτὰς δυνάμεις, ἀλλὰ ἀσθενεστέρας ἢ κατὰ τὴν χαλβάνην, ἐκείνης γε κατ’ ἀμφοτέρας ἰσχυροτέρας ὑπαρχούσης. ἡ τερμινθίνη δὲ ῥητίνη καὶ αὐτὴ μετὰ τοῦ ῥυπτικοῦ τε καὶ διαφορητικοῦ πεπτικὸν ἔχει τι τῶν τοιούτων διαθέσεων. ἡ δὲ ἄσφαλτος ἴσμεν ὅτι ξηραντικῆς ἐστι δυνάμεως ἅμα θερμασίᾳ μὴ πάνυ σφοδρᾷ. τούτοις οὖν ἅπασιν ὁ συνθεὶς τὴν ἔμπλαστρον ἔμιξεν ἑλκτικῆς δυνάμεως φάρμακον τὴν πρόπολιν, ἐπειδὴ πολύχρηστον ὑπάρχειν αὐτὴν ἐβούλετο. πάντα δ’ ὅσα πολύχρηστα ποικιλωτάτας ἀναγκαῖον ἔχειν δυνάμεις, ὅπως θεραπεύῃ διαθέσεις πλείονας. οὕτως δὲ καὶ τοῦ μέλιτος ἔμιξεν οὐκ ὀλίγον, εἰδὼς αὐτὸ ξηραῖνόν τε καὶ διαφοροῦν οἰκειότατόν τε τοῖς σηπομένοις ὑπάρχον. καὶ γὰρ αὖ καὶ τὸ τῶν ἀσήπτων ἐστὶ καὶ τὰ μιγνύμενα φυλάττει τοιαῦτα, πλὴν τῶν ἐσχάτως ἐπιτηδείων εἰς σῆψιν, ἅπερ ὑγρά τέ ἐστι καὶ θερμά. καὶ πλέον τῶν ἄλλων γε ὁ συνθεὶς τὸ φάρμακον ἔβαλε τὸ μέλι. πλὴν γὰρ τριῶν τῶν ἑψηθῆναι δεομένων, ἀσφάλτου καὶ λιθαργύρου καὶ τῆς ἀμπελίτιδος γῆς, τῶν ἄλλων πλέον ἐστίν· αὐτοῖς τε τούτοις τῇ τε ἀσφάλτῳ καὶ τῷ λιθαργύρῳ καὶ τῇ ἀμπελίτιδι τοσοῦτον ἔμιξεν ἔλαιον, ὅσον εἰς τὴν ἕψησιν ἐπιτήδειον ἔσται, παραστοχασάμενος καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ὅσα ξηρὰ κατὰ τὸ φάρμακον βάλλεται.

Ampelitis [i.e unidentified medicinal clay] dries and disperses with no clear sharpness. For this reason it is suitable for hard-to-heal ulcers, if you pound it finely and sprinkle it on [the ulcer] by itself. Galbanum is mixed in the aforementioned formulation because it promotes concoction, softens, soothes, and relieves pain, since frankincense has the same properties but weaker whereas galbanum has both faculties stronger. Terebinth resin, in addition to a cleansing and dispersing element, has something capable of promoting concoction of such conditions. We know that bitumen has a drying capacity along with a heating capacity that is not at all excessive. With all these substances the compounder mixes propolis – a drug with attractive capacities – when he wishes the plaster to be multipurpose. All multipurpose remedies must have highly diversified capacities, in order to treat several conditions. So the compounder also mixes honey in no small amount, knowing that it is drying, dispersing, and suitable for [ulcers] undergoing putrefaction. Furthermore, honey [itself] is one of those substances not subject to putrefaction, and it preserves from putrefaction the ingredients in the mixture, except those that are extremely predisposed to it – namely susbtances that are moist and hot. The compounder of the remedy adds more honey than the rest of the ingredients. In fact, except for the three substances that require cooking – bitumen, litharge, and ampelitis – the quantity of honey exceeds that of the others; and with these substances – bitumen, litharge, and ampelitis –  the compounder mixes as much oil as will be suitable for the cooking, evaluating also how much of the dry ingredients – among the other substances – are added to the remedy.

Chunk 8
ἐγκάθισμα πρὸς αἱμοῤῥοΐδας τὸ Φανίου. χαλκάνθου, στυπτηρίας σχιστῆς, χαλκίτεως, μίσυος ὠμοῦ, σανδαράχης ἀνὰ δραχμὰς δ΄. λεῖα πάντα ἔχε. ἐπὶ τῆς χρήσεως οὖρον παλαιὸν ταριχηρὸν ἀνδρὸς ἑνὸς, μέτρῳ ξε. β΄. βάλε εἰς ὀστρακίνην λεκάνην, τοῦ δὲ φαρμάκου δραχ. ιβ΄. προσέγχεον τοῦ οὔρου, ὥστε ἀεὶ τοὺς δύο ξέστας τηρεῖσθαι. τούτῳ χρῶ ἐγκαθίζων ἐπὶ ἡμέρας ζ΄. ἐν ταύταις γὰρ ἐνεργεῖ. ὅταν δὲ γλοιῶδες γένηται τῇ ὑποστάθμῃ, περίχριε τὸ δακτύλιον. ξηρὸν σάρκας ἐπουλοῦν, ἄδηκτον, ὡς Ἁρπόκρας. ♃ σανδαράχης, χρυσοκόλλης, ἀρσενικοῦ τὸ ἴσον ἑκάστου καὶ πρὸς κακοήθη ποιεῖ. πρὸς νομὰς ὁ Ἀσκληπιὸς λεγόμενος. ♃ χαλκίτεως, ἀρσενικοῦ τὸ ἴσον, ἀσβέστου τὸ διπλοῦν. ἔχει δὲ καὶ σανδαράχης ἴσην πρὸς τὰ ἄλλα. πρὸς τὰ ἐν δακτυλίῳ, στυπτηρίας ὑγρᾶς ἡλίκον κάρυον, σὺν μέλιτος κυάθοις δυσὶν ἑψήσας χρῶ. ξηρὸν πρὸς νομὰς ᾧ χρῶμαι. ♃ λεπίδος, ἀῤῥενικοῦ, χάρτου κεκαυμένου, μολύβδου κεκαυμένου ἀνὰ δραχ. δ΄. θείου ἀπύρου δραχ. ε΄. λεάνας χρῶ. ἄλλως. ♃ λεπίδος, ἀρσενικοῦ, θείου, μολύβδου κεκαυμένου, χαλκοῦ ἀνὰ δραχ. δ΄. σανδαράχης δραχ. δ΄. ἰοῦ δραχμὴν α΄. χάρτου κεκαυμένου δραχ. δ΄. χρῶ σὺν ῥοδίνῳ ἢ μέλιτι. Κρίσπου τὸ εὐῶδες πρὸς νομάς. ♃ λεπίδος δραχ. β΄. ἀῤῥενικοῦ δραχ. β΄. σανδαράχης δραχ. β΄. κηκίδος δραχ. δ΄. σμύρνης δραχμὴν α΄. λιβάνου δραχμὴν α΄. χαλκάνθου δραχ. β΄. χάρτου κεκαυμένου δραχ. δ΄. λείοις χρῶ. πρὸς νομὰς Ἀντιπάτρου. ♃ χρυσοκόλλης οὐγγίας στ΄. ἀῤῥενικοῦ οὐγγίας στ΄. ξηρῷ καὶ σὺν ῥοδίνῳ. ἄλλο, ὡς Ἀλκιμίων. ♃ ἀρσενικοῦ δραχ. β΄. λεπίδος δραχ. γ΄. χρυσοκόλλης δραχμὴν α΄. ξηρῷ καὶ σὺν ῥοδίνῳ.

Sitz bath for haemorrhoids by Phanion. Chalkanthos [copper mineral], split alum, chalkitis [i.e. copper mineral], uncooked misy [i.e. copper mineral], realgar [i.e. arsenic sulphide mineral], 4 drachmai each, all finely pounded. For administration, [add] old salted urin of one man, in the amount of 2 sextarii. Add 12 drachmai of the remedy in a clay pot. Pour also the urin so that it always maintains the [volume of] 2 sextarii. I use it by sitting on it for 7 days, for that is the duration of the drug action. Whenever it becomes slimy in the sediment, smear it over the anus. Drying, flesh-cicatrising, non-biting remedy, as reported by Arpokras. Realgar, malachite, yellow orpiment [i.e. arsenic sulphide mineral]; the same amount of each works also on hard-to-heal ulcers. For spreading ulcers, Asklepios states: Chalkitis, yellow orpiment in the same amount, quicklime double the amount. It also has the same amount of realgar as the other ingredients. For ulcers in the anus, add a nut of moist alum; boil in 2 kyathoi of honey and use. Drying remedy for spreading ulcers, which I use. [Copper] Flakes, yellow orpiment, burnt papyrus, burnt lead, 4 drachmai each; uncooked sulphur, 5 drachmai; pound and administer. Different version. [Copper] Flakes, yellow orpiment, sulphur, burnt lead, copper, 4 drachmai each; realgar, 4 drachmai; verdigris, 1 drachme; burnt papyrus, 4 drachmai. Administer with rose oil or honey. Fragrant remedy by Krispos for spreading ulcers. [Copper] Flakes, 2 drachmai; yellow orpiment, 2 drachmai; realgar, 2 drachmae; oak gall, 4 drachmai; myrrh, 1 drachme; frankincense, 1 drachme; chalkantos, 2 drachmai; burnt papyrus, 4 drachmai. Use finely pounded. Remedy for spreading ulcers by Antipatros. Malachite, 6 unciae; yellow orpiment, 6 drachmai. Administer dry and with rose oil. Another remedy, as Alkimion reported. Yellow orpiment, 2 drachmai; [copper] flakes, 3 drachmai; malachite, 1 drachme. Administer dry and with rose oil. 

Chunk 9
τερμινθίνης δραχ. μη΄. ἀριστολοχίας δραχ. μη΄. πίσσης δραχμὰς ἐνενήκοντα ἓξ, κηροῦ δραχμὰς ἐνενήκοντα ἓξ, ἀμμωνιακοῦ δραχμὰς ἐνενήκοντα ἕξ. οὕτως μὲν ὁ Ἀνδρόμαχος ἔγραψεν. ἔξεστί σοι καὶ δι’ ἐλάττονος συμμετρίας αὐτὴν σκευάζειν, ἑκάστου τῶν εἰρημένων τέταρτον μόριον μιγνύντα. γενήσεται γὰρ ἡ σύνθεσις τοιάδε. ♃ λιθαργύρου δραχ. λστ΄. ἀσβέστου δὲ καὶ χαλκοῦ κεκαυμένου καὶ λιβανωτοῦ καὶ τερμινθίνης καὶ ἀριστολοχίας τὸ τρίτον ἑκάστου σταθμῷ τῆς λιθαργύρου, τουτέστι δραχ. ιβ΄. εἶτα πίσσης καὶ κηροῦ καὶ ἀμμωνιακοῦ θυμιάματος, ἑκάστου τὸ διπλάσιον τῶν εἰρημένων πέμπτων φαρμάκων, τῆς ἀριστολοχίας λέγω καὶ τερμινθίνης καὶ λιβάνου καὶ χαλκοῦ κεκαυμένου καὶ ἀσβέστου. χρὴ δὲ τὴν ἄσβεστον ἀκατάσβεστον δηλονότι καὶ πρόσφατον εἶναι, οὕτω τὸ φάρμακον καὶ πρὸς τὰ σηπεδονώδη χρήσιμον γίνεται. ἅπαντα δὲ διὰ δραχμῶν γράψας ὁ Ἀνδρόμαχος τὰ φάρμακα κάλλιον ἂν ἐπεποιήκει κατὰ τὴν αὐτὴν συμμετρίαν καὶ τοῦ ἐλαίου μνημονεῦσαι, ὡς ἕλκειν τὸ βαλλόμενον δραχμὰς τοσάσδε ἢ εἰ μὴ τοῦτο. πάντως γοῦν ἐχρῆν αὐτὸν τῆς Ῥωμαϊκῆς λίτρας μνημονεῦσαι. νυνὶ δὲ κοτύλην γράφει, τὴν συνήθη περὶ τοῦ μέτρου τούτου καταλιπὼν ἡμῖν ἀμφιβολίαν, εἴτ’ ἐννέα μετρικῶν οὐγγιῶν, εἴτε δώδεκα βούλεται τὴν κοτύλην εἶναι. κατὰ δὲ τὴν ἐμὴν γνώμην ἡ μὲν τελεία συμμετρία τὰς γο στ΄. τοῦ σταθμοῦ λαμβανέτω, διὰ τὸ τὴν Ῥωμαϊκὴν λίτραν ἕλκειν γο ιβ΄. κατὰ δὲ τὸ δ΄. ἂν σκευάσῃς, εὔδηλος ἡ ἀναλογία. εὔδηλον δὲ καὶ ἐὰν δραχμὰς εἴπῃ τις εἰς τὴν τελείαν συμμετρίαν λαμβάνεσθαι ὑπ΄. διὰ τὸ τὴν σταθμικὴν οὐγγίαν η΄. δραχμὰς ἕλκειν.

Terebinth resin, 48 drachmai; aristolochia, 48 drachmai; pitch, 96 drachmai; wax, 96 drachmai; gum ammoniac, 96 drachmai. Andromachus wrote thus. You can prepare a smaller batch of the compound by mixing ¼ of each of the ingredients listed. So the recipe will become as follows: litharge, 36 drachmai; unslaked lime, burnt copper, frankincense, terebinth resin, aristolochia, 1/3 of the weight of the litharge, i.e. 12 drachmai; pitch, wax, gum ammoniac, double the amount of each of the five aforementioned drugs, i.e. aristolochia, terebinth resin, frankincense, burnt copper, unslaked lime. The unslaked lime must be manifestly completely unslaked and fresh, so the remedy is useful also for [ulcers] at risk of putrefaction. Given that Andromachus wrote all the ingredients in drachmai, it would have been better if he had also mentioned the oil in the same units, so that the oil added would equal the weight in drachmai, or, if not this, he should have at least mentioned the Roman libra. Instead, here he writes ‘kotyle’, leaving us the usual ambiguity about this unit of measurement, whether he intends the kotyle to be 9 unciae of mass/volume or 12 unciae. In my opinion, the correct amount should be 6 unciae of weight, because the Roman libra weighs 12 unciae. If you prepare 1/4 [of the prescribed amount], the proportion is clear, but it is clear even if one says to consider 480 drachmai for the final amount, since the uncia of weight corresponds to 8 drachmai. 

Chunk 10
ι΄. ἀριστολοχίας δραχ. ι΄. οἱ δὲ κ΄. πεπέρεως λευκοῦ δραχ. ι΄. καὶ μακροῦ δραχ. ι΄. ξυλοβαλσάμου δραχ. ι΄. καρδαμώμου δραχ. ι΄. οἰσύπου δραχ. ιε΄. ἐβίσκου ῥίζης δραχ. ι΄. ξιφίου ῥίζης δραχ. ι΄. στύρακος δραχ. ι΄. καππάρεως ῥίζης δραχ. ι΄. ἴρεως Ἰλλυρικῆς δραχ. ι΄. ἀλόης Ἰνδικῆς δραχ. ι΄. χαλβάνης δραχ. ι΄. ἰξοῦ δρυΐνου δραχ. ι΄. οἱ δὲ ιβ΄. στέατος χηνείου δραχ. η΄. ῥητίνης ξηρᾶς δραχ. ιβ΄. ὑποστάθμης ἴρεως τὸ ἱκανόν. ἄλλο Ἀμυθάωνος πρὸς θώρακος καὶ ὑποχονδρίων καὶ στομάχου ἀλγηδόνας καὶ πρὸς ἀγκύλας καὶ ἀποστήματα, καὶ σκληρίας μαλάσσει. ♃ ἀμμωνιακοῦ θυμιάματος δραχ. ν΄. κηροῦ δραχ. κ΄. βδελλίου δραχ. ν΄. ῥητίνης τερμινθίνης δραχ. κ΄. ἴρεως Ἰλλυρικῆς δραχ. ι΄. χαλβάνης δραχ. ε΄. τὸ βδέλλιον οἴνῳ διαχεῖται καὶ ἀμμωνιακὸν, εἶτα καὶ τὰ τηκτὰ καταχεῖται καὶ συλλεαίνεται, ἰρίνου προσμεμιγμένου. μάλαγμα Ἀντιπάτρου πρὸς κωλικοὺς καὶ πάντα τὰ ἐντός. ♃ σιλφίου δραχ. β΄ ἐλελισφάκου δραχ. δ΄. κασσίας δραχ. δ΄. μελανθίου δραχ. δ΄. σταφίδος ἀγρίας δραχ. δ΄. χαλβάνης δραχ. δ΄. στρουθίου δραχ. δ΄. θείου ἀπύρου δραχ. δ΄. πάνακος δραχ. ζ΄. προπόλεως δραχ. ζ΄. πυρέθρου δραχ. ζ΄. ἀμμωνιακοῦ θυμιάματος δραχ. ζ΄. νίτρου δραχ. ζ΄. Ἀσίου ἄνθους δραχ. κε΄. κηροῦ δραχ. ρν΄. ῥητίνης δραχ. ρν΄. ἐλαίου κοτύλην α΄. ἄλλο μάλαγμα Καλλινίκου ἐκ τῶν Πακκίου πρὸς πάντα. ♃ κηροῦ νέου δραχ. ρ΄. ἀμμωνιακοῦ θυμιάματος, τερμινθίνης, βδελλίου διαυγοῦς ἀνὰ δραχ. ν΄. ὑοσκυάμου σπέρματος δραχ. λ΄. ὀποῦ μήκωνος δραχ. κ΄. μελιλώτου, σμύρνης, ἀριστολοχίας, πεπέρεως, γεντιανῆς, στύρακος, ἑκάστου ἀνὰ δραχ. ιε΄. λιβάνου δραχ.

[ingredient] 10 [drachmai]; aristolochia, 10 drachmai, some say 20; white pepper, 10 drachmai; long pepper, 10 drachmai; balsamwood [resin], 10 drachmai; cardamom, 10 drachmai; wool grease, 15 drachmai; marsh mallow root, 10 drachmai; silphium root, 10 drachmai; styrax [i.e. s. officinalis] resin, 10 drachmai; caper-plant root, 10 drachmai; Illyrian iris, 10 drachmai; Indian aloe, 10 drachmai; galbanum, 10 drachmai; birdlime [obtained from European mistletoe that grows on oak], 10 drachmai, some say 12; goose fat, 8 drachmai; dry resin, 12 drachmai; sediment of iris [unguent], as needed. Another remedy by Amythaon for pains in the chest, hypochondrion, stomach and for ankylosed joints and abscesses; it also softens hardenings. Gum ammoniac, 50 drachmai; wax, 20 drachmai; bdellium, 50 drachmai; terebinth resin, 20 drachmai; Illyrian iris, 10 drachmai; galbanum, 5 drachmai. Bdellium and gum ammoniac must be dissolved in wine; then the melted substances are poured over and blended together, after the addition of the Iris unguent. Emollient plaster by Antipatros for people suffering from colics and any internal condition. Silphium, 2 drachmai; sage, 4 drachmai; cassia, 4 drachmai; black cummin, 4 drachmai; stavesacre, 4 drachmai; galbanum, 4 drachmai; soapwort, 4 drachmai; uncooked sulphur, 4 drachmai; all-heal, 7 drachmai; propolis, 7 drachmai; pellitory, 7 drachmai; gum ammoniac, 7 drachmai; nitron [i.e. sodium carbonate], 7 drachmai; Asian flower, 25 drachmai; wax, 150 drachmai; resin, 150 drachmai; olive oil, one kotyle. Another emollient plaster by Kallinikos taken from those written by Pakkios for any condition. Fresh wax, 100 drachmai; gum ammoniac, terebinth resin, transparent bdellium, 50 drachmai each; henbane seeds, 30 drachmai; opium, 20 drachmai; melilotus, myrrh, aristolochia, pepper, gentian, styrax [i.e. styrax officinalis] resin, 15 drachmai each; frankincense. 


