Chunk 1

Ὅτι μὲν ἐκ θερμοῦ καὶ ψυχροῦ καὶ ξηροῦ καὶ ὑγροῦ τὰ τῶν ζῴων σώματα κέκραται καὶ ὡς οὐκ ἴση πάντων ἐστὶν ἐν τῇ κράσει μοῖρα, παλαιοῖς ἀνδράσιν ἱκανῶς ἀποδέδεικται φιλοσόφων τε καὶ ἰατρῶν τοῖς ἀρίστοις· εἴρηται δὲ καὶ πρὸς ἡμῶν ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν τὰ εἰκότα δι’ ἑτέρου γράμματος, ἐν ᾦ περὶ τῶν καθ’ Ἱπποκράτην στοιχείων ἐσκοπούμεθα. νυνὶ δ’, ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἐφεξῆς ἐκείνῳ, ἁπάσας ἐξευρεῖν τῶν κράσεων τὰς διαφοράς, ὁπόσαι τ’ εἰσὶ καὶ ὁποῖαι κατ’ εἴδη τε καὶ γένη διαιρουμένοις, ἐν τῷδε τῷ γράμματι δίειμι τὴν ἀρχὴν ἀπὸ τῆς τῶν ὀνομάτων ἐξηγήσεως ποιησάμενος. ἐπειδὰν μὲν γὰρ ἐκ θερμοῦ καὶ ψυχροῦ καὶ ξηροῦ καὶ ὑγροῦ κεκρᾶσθαι λέγωσι τὰ σώματα, τῶν ἄκρως τοιούτων ἀκούειν φασὶ χρῆναι, τουτέστι τῶν στοιχείων αὐτῶν, ἀέρος καὶ πυρὸς καὶ ὕδατος καὶ γῆς· ἐπειδὰν δὲ ζῷον ἢ φυτὸν ἤτοι θερμὸν ἢ ψυχρὸν ἢ ξηρὸν ἢ ὑγρὸν εἶναι λέγωσιν, οὐκέθ’ ὡσαύτως. οὐδὲ γὰρ δύνασθαι ζῷον οὐδὲν οὔτ’ ἄκρως θερμὸν ὑπάρχειν ὡς πῦρ οὔτ’ ἄκρως ὑγρὸν ὡς ὕδωρ. ὡσαύτως δ’ οὐδὲ ψυχρὸν ἢ ξηρὸν ἐσχάτως, ἀλλ’ ἀπὸ τοῦ πλεονεκτοῦντος ἐν τῇ κράσει γίγνεσθαι τὰς προσηγορίας, ὑγρὸν μὲν καλούντων ἡμῶν, ἐν ᾧ πλείων ὑγρότητός ἐστι μοῖρα, ξηρὸν δ’, ἐν ᾧ ξηρότητος· οὕτω δὲ καὶ θερμὸν μέν, ἐν ᾧ τὸ θερμὸν τοῦ ψυχροῦ πλεονεκτεῖ, ψυχρὸν δ’, ἐν ᾧ τὸ ψυχρὸν τοῦ θερμοῦ. αὕτη μὲν ἡ τῶν ὀνομάτων χρῆσις.

That the bodies of animals are compounded from hot, cold, dry, and wet, and that all the parts are not equal in their krasis, has been adequately shown by the ancients—the best of both philosophers and doctors. The probabilities regarding these were also stated by us in another work, in which we examined the elements according to Hippocrates. What follows now in sequence, which is next in order to that, is to discover all the differentiae of the krasias. In this work, I shall go through how many there are and of what kinds, divided according to class and kind, making a start from the explanation of the terms. When they say the bodies are compounded from hot, cold, dry, and wet, they say it is necessary to understand such things completely—that is to say, the elements themselves, which are air, fire, water, and earth. When they say an animal or plant is either hot, cold, dry, or wet, it is no longer similar, for no animal can either be completely hot as fire is, or completely wet, as water is. Likewise, no animal can be entirely cold or dry. Rather, the appellations arise from what prevails in the krasis, since we call wet a part in which there is a greater amount of wetness, and dry a part in which there is a greater amount of dryness. In like manner too, a part is hot in which the hot prevails over the cold, and conversely cold in which the cold prevails over the hot. This is the actual use of the terms.

That the bodies of animals consist of a mixture of hot, cold, dry and wet and that there is not an equal portion of all these in the mixture, has been adequately demonstrated by men of ancient times, the best of both philosophers and doctors; and the appropriate things have been stated by us, too, in a separate work, in which we investigated the elements according to Hippocrates. Now, however, I shall do what follows on from that, namely go through in this work the discovery of all the distinct types of mixtures: how many there are, and of what kind, as one separates them by genus and species; and I shall take my starting point from an explanation of the terms used. When they say that bodies consist of a mixture of hot, cold, dry and wet, they state that one should understand [these terms as applying to] things which are so in the extreme, in other words to the elements themselves: air, fire, water and earth; but when they say that an animal or plant is hot, cold, dry or wet, it is not so in the same way. For, [the argument continues], no animal can be hot in the extreme, like fire, nor wet in the extreme, like water; and likewise, no animal can be cold or dry in their ultimate manifestations. Rather, such appellations derive from that which predominates in the mixture: we call that body wet in which the portion of wetness is greater, and that dry, in which the portion of dryness is greater; and similarly, that hot in which the hot predominates over the cold, and that cold in which the cold predominates over the hot. This, then, is the way in which the terms are used.

Chunk 2

καὶ τοῦτό γ’ ἐστὶ τὸ μάλιστα νοσῶδες ἐργαζόμενον τὸ φθινόπωρον, ἡ ἀνωμαλία τῆς κράσεως. οὐκ ὀρθῶς οὖν εἴρηται ψυχρὸν καὶ ξηρόν, οὐ γάρ ἐστι ψυχρόν αὐτὸ καθ’ αὑτὸ θεωρούμενον, ὥσπερ ὁ χειμών, ἀλλὰ τῷ θέρει παραβαλλόμενον ἐκείνου ψυχρότερον. οὐ μὴν οὐδ’ ὁμαλῶς εὔκρατον, ὡς τὸ ἔαρ, ἀλλ’ ἐν τούτῳ δὴ καὶ μάλιστα διενήνοχεν ἐκείνης τῆς ὥρας, ὅτι τὴν εὐκρασίαν τε καὶ τὴν ὁμαλότητα διὰ παντὸς ἴσην οὐ κέκτηται. πολὺ γὰρ θερμότερόν ἐστι κατὰ τὴν μεσημβρίαν ἢ κατὰ τὴν ἕω τε καὶ τὴν ἑσπέραν. ὑγρότητος δὲ καὶ ξηρότητος οὐκ ἀκριβῶς μέν ἐστι μέσον, ὡς τὸ ἔαρ, ἀλλ’ ἐπὶ τὸ ξηρότερον ῥέπει. λείπεται δὲ κἀν τούτῳ τοῦ θέρους, οὐ μὴν τοσοῦτόν γ’ ὅσον θερμότητι. δῆλον οὖν, ὡς οὐδὲ τὸ φθινόπωρον ἁπλῶς οὕτω ῥητέον, ὡς ἐκεῖνοι λέγουσι, ψυχρόν τ’ εἶναι καὶ ξηρόν. ἄκρως μὲν γὰρ οὐδέτερόν ἐστιν, ἐπικρατεῖ δ’ ἐν αὐτῷ τὸ ξηρὸν τοῦ ὑγροῦ καὶ δικαίως ἂν λεχθείη ταύτῃ μὲν ξηρόν, ἐν δὲ τῇ κατὰ θερμότητα καὶ ψυχρότητα διαφορᾷ μικτὸν ἐξ ἀμφοῖν καὶ ἀνώμαλον. Ὥστ’ εἴπερ τὰς τέτταρας συζυγίας τῶν κράσεων εἰς τὰς τέτταρας ὥρας διανεῖμαι σπουδάζουσιν, ἴστωσαν οὐ μόνον ἦρι κακῶς προσάψαντες ὑγρότητα καὶ θερμότητα κράσεως, ἀλλὰ καὶ φθινοπώρῳ ψυχρότητα καὶ ξηρότητα. καίτοι γ’, εἰ καὶ τοῦτο συνεχωρεῖτο ξηρὸν εἶναι καὶ ψυχρόν, οὐκ ἦν ἀναγκαῖον εὐθέως ὑγρὸν εἶναι καὶ θερμὸν τὸ ἔαρ.

And this, the non-uniformity of the krasis, is what makes the autumn particularly baneful. Therefore, it is not correctly described as cold and dry, for it is not to be considered cold in itself, like the winter, but when compared to summer it is colder than that. Nor again is it uniformly eukratic, like the spring, but in this differs most from that season because it has not acquired the equal eukrasia and evenness throughout. For autumn is much hotter at midday than it is at dawn or dusk, and it is not precisely midway between wetness and dryness as spring is, but tends toward being drier. However, even in this, it is wanting compared to summer, but not in fact as much as it is wanting in hotness. Clearly, then, one must not speak absolutely of autumn as being cold and dry in this way, as those men say. It is neither to the extreme, although in it the dryness prevails over the wetness in this, and it could legitimately be described as dry on this basis, while in the difference pertaining to hotness and coldness, it is a mixture of both and non-uniform. As a consequence, if they hope to apportion the four conjunctions of the krasias to the four seasons, they should know that not only do they wrongly attribute the wet and hot krasis to spring, but also the cold and dry to autumn. And indeed, even if the latter were agreed to be dry and cold, it would not be immediately necessary for spring to be wet and hot.
And it is this that makes autumn so particularly conducive to sickness: the unevenness of the mixture. It is not, therefore, correctly called cold and dry; for it is not cold when one considers it in itself, like winter, but only colder when compared with summer. Nor, on the other hand, is it evenly well-mixed, like spring, its chief difference from that season being that it does not possess an equal good-mixture and evenness throughout. For autumn is much hotter at midday than at dawn or dusk. Nor is it precisely at the midpoint between wetness and dryness, like spring: it tends to be drier. In this, too, it falls short of summer; but not, certainly, as much as it does in hotness. It is evident, then, that autumn should also not be called cold and dry in absolute terms, as those people say. For it has neither [quality] in the extreme sense. The dry does dominate over the wet, so that it may rightly be called dry in that respect; with regard to the difference between hotness and coldness, however, it is a combination of both, and is uneven. If, then, those persons are so eager to apportion to each of the four seasons one of the four pairings of the mixtures, they should realize their error not only in the association of spring with wetness and hotness, but also of autumn with coldness and dryness. And yet even if it were agreed that the latter were dry and cold, it would not immediately be necessary that spring was wet and hot.

Chunk 3

ἐν τούτοις δὲ τὸ μὲν πρὸς ἄνθρωπον παραβάλλειν πρὸς ὁμοειδές ἐστι παραβάλλειν, τὸ δὲ πρὸς μέλιτταν ἢ μύρμηκα πρὸς ὁμογενές, ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ πρὸς φυτὸν ὁτιοῦν. ἔστι γὰρ ἀνωτέρω τοῦ ζῴου τοῦτο τὸ γένος, ὥσπερ οὖν καὶ αὐτοῦ τούτου λίθος καὶ σίδηρος καὶ χαλκὸς ἐκ τῶν ἄνωθεν γενῶν. καλείσθω γοῦν 〈πρὸς〉 ὁμογενὲς ἕνεκα συντόμου διδασκαλίας ἡ τοιαύτη σύμπασα παραβολή, τοσόνδε μόνον ἐν αὐτῇ διελομένων ἡμῶν, ὡς, ἐπειδὰν μὲν ἁπλῶς οὐσία τις εὔκρατος λέγηται καὶ ταύτης δέ τις ἑτέρα ξηροτέρα καὶ θερμοτέρα καὶ ψυχροτέρα καὶ ὑγροτέρα, τὴν μὲν εὔκρατον ἐνταῦθα τὴν ἐκ τῶν ἐναντίων ἀκριβῶς ἴσων συνελθόντων ὀνομάζομεν, ὅσον δ’ ἀπολείπεται τῆσδε καὶ πλεονεκτεῖ κατά τι, τῷ τοῦ πλεονεκτοῦντος ὀνόματι προσαγορεύομεν· ἐπειδὰν δ’ ἤτοι φυτὸν εὔκρατον ἢ ζῷον ὁτιοῦν εἴπωμεν, οὐκέθ’ ἁπλῶς ἀλλήλοις ἐν τῇ τοιαύτῃ λέξει τἀναντία παραβάλλομεν, ἀλλὰ πρὸς τὴν τοῦ φυτοῦ φύσιν ἢ τὴν τοῦ ζῴου τὴν ἀναφορὰν ποιούμεθα, συκῆν μὲν εὔκρατον. εἰ τύχοι, λέγοντες, ὅταν, οἵᾳ μάλιστα πρέπει τὴν φύσιν ὑπάρχειν συκῇ, τοιαύτη τις ᾖ, κύνα δ’ αὖ καὶ σῦν καὶ ἵππον καὶ ἄνθρωπον, ἐπειδὰν καὶ τούτων ἕκαστον ἄριστα τῆς οἰκείας ἔχῃ φύσεως. αὐτὸ δὲ δὴ τοῦτο τὸ τῆς οἰκείας φύσεως ἔχειν ἄριστα ταῖς ἐνεργείαις κρίνεται. καὶ γὰρ καὶ φυτὸν καὶ ζῷον ὁτιοῦν ἄριστα διακεῖσθαι τηνικαῦτά φαμεν, ὅταν ἐνεργῄσῃ κάλλιστα.

In these, the comparison to a human is a comparison to the same kind (species), while that to a bee or ant is to the same class, and similarly also to a plant of whatever kind. For this class is higher than that of animal just as also that of stone, iron, and copper is from the classes higher than this itself. Anyway, for the sake of brevity in teaching, let every such comparison be called homogenous, while we make a distinction in this only as much as when some substance is called eukratic in an absolute sense, while some other substance is drier, hotter, colder, and wetter than this, we term the eukratic here the precisely equal coming together of the opposites, while as much as it falls short of this and predominates relatively, we call by the name of what predominates. However, when we say either a plant or an animal is eukratic in any way whatsoever, in such a statement we are not comparing opposites with each other absolutely, but are making the reference to the nature of the plant or animal, calling a fig tree eukratic, for example, when it is such as to particularly resemble the nature of a fig tree, and the same applies to a dog, pig, horse, and human, when each of these has the best of the characteristic nature. This itself—having the best of the characteristic nature—is judged by the functions. For surely, we say any plant or animal whatsoever is in the best state when it functions best.

Of these, the comparison with another man is a comparison within the same species, while the comparison with bees or ants is one within the same genus, as, equally, is the comparison with any plant. The genus in question in the latter case is a higher one than that of animals; so, in the same way, that which includes stone, iron and bronze is even higher than that. So, for the sake of brevity of exposition, let all comparisons of this kind be called comparisons within the same genus. But let us just make this distinction among them: that when some existent object is called well-mixed in absolute terms, and some other is called drier, hotter, colder or wetter than it, the one that we are calling well-mixed, in this context, is that [which is composed] from a precise equality of opposites coming together, while whatever has some deficiency or predominance in relation to this we refer to by the term for whatever predominates. When, however, we speak of a well-mixed plant or animal, we are not with this kind of verbal expression comparing opposites with each other in the absolute sense, but rather using as our point of reference the nature of the plant or animal [in question]. We would say, for example, that a fig tree was well-mixed if it were one possessed of that nature which is most appropriate to a fig tree; and the same of a dog, pig, horse or human being when each of these, similarly, was in the best state with regard to its own nature. And this matter of ‘being in the best state with regard to its own nature’ is assessed in terms of the activities. For indeed we state any plant or animal to be in the best state when it performs its activities optimally.

Chunk 4

ὅσα μὲν οὖν σκληρότερα τοῦ δέρματός ἐστι μόρια, καθάπερ ὀστᾶ καὶ χόνδροι καὶ κέρατα καὶ τρίχες ὄνυχές τε καὶ σύνδεσμοι καὶ ὁπλαὶ καὶ πλῆκτρα, πλέον ἐν τούτοις ἐστὶ τὸ ξηρόν· ὅσα δὲ μαλακώτερα, καθάπερ αἷμα καὶ φλέγμα καὶ πιμελὴ καὶ στέαρ καὶ μυελὸς ἐγκέφαλός τε καὶ νωτιαῖος, ὑγροῦ πλέον ἐν τούτοις ἐστὶν ἢ ξηροῦ· καὶ μὲν δὴ καὶ ὅσῳ τὸ πάντων ξηρότατον ἐν ἀνθρώπῳ μόριον ὑπερβάλλει σκληρότητι τοῦ δέρματος, τοσούτῳ πάλιν ἀπολείπεται τὸ ὑγρότατον. ἔοικε δέ πως ὁ λόγος ἤδη τῶν χρησιμωτάτων αὐτῶν ἐφάπτεσθαι καὶ διδάσκειν, ἅμα μὲν ὡς οὐ ζῴων μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἁπάντων σωμάτων εὐκρατότατός ἐστιν ὁ ἄνθρωπος, ἅμα δ’ ὡς τῶν ἐν αὐτῷ μορίων τὸ τῆς χειρὸς δέρμα τὸ ἔσωθεν ἁπάσας ἐκπέφευγεν ἀκριβῶς τὰς ὑπερβολάς. Ἐπιστήσαντες οὖν πάλιν ἐνταῦθα τὸν λόγον ἐπισκεψώμεθα, τίς ἄριστα κέκραται πάντων ἄνθρωπος, ὃν καὶ τῆς ὅλης μὲν οὐσίας, ἔτι δὲ μᾶλλον ἀνθρώπων τε καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ζῴων ἐν τῷ μέσῳ χρὴ τάξαντας, καθάπερ τινὰ κανόνα καὶ γνώμονα, τοὺς ἄλλους ἅπαντας τούτῳ παραβάλλοντας θερμοὺς καὶ ψυχροὺς καὶ ξηροὺς καὶ ὑγροὺς ὀνομάζειν. δεῖ δὲ συνδραμεῖν ἐς ταὐτὸν ἐπὶ τοῦδε πολλὰ γνωρίσματα. καὶ γὰρ ὡς πρὸς τὴν ὅλην οὐσίαν ἐξετάζοντι μέσον χρὴ φαίνεσθαι τὸν τοιοῦτον, ἔτι δὲ μᾶλλον ὡς πρὸς ἀνθρώπους τε καὶ ζῷα. τὰ μὲν οὖν ἁπάσης τῆς οὐσίας κοινὰ γνωρίσματα προείρηται· τὰ δ’ ὡς ἐν ζῴων εἴδεσιν ἐνεργείας τελειότητι κρίνεται τῆς ἑκάστῳ πρεπούσης.

Therefore, those parts that are harder than skin, such as bones, cartilages, horns, hair, nails, ligaments, hooves, and spurs have more dry in them, whereas those that are softer, like blood, phlegm, soft fat, hard fat, marrow, brain, and spinal cord, have more wet in them than dry. Furthermore, the amount by which the driest part of all in a human exceeds the dryness of the skin is in turn that by which the wettest part is deficient. The argument already seems somehow to touch on what is most useful, and to teach that the human is at the same time not only the most eukratic of animals and of all other bodies, but also that of the parts in a human, the skin of the palmar surface of the hand completely escapes all the excesses. Stopping the argument again here, let us consider which person is best compounded (has the best temperament) of all—someone whom, in terms of the whole substance, we must place as the median of humans especially and of other animals, like some standard and criterion (gnomon), by comparison with which all others are termed hot, cold, dry, and wet. We need to bring together to this the many signs in this case. For surely, to one examining the whole substance, such a person must appear to be median, especially as regards humans and animals. The signs common to the whole substance have been previously stated; those in species (kinds) of animals are judged by the perfection of function appropriate to each.
Now, those parts which are harder than skin, such as bones, cartilage, horns, hair, nails, ligaments, hooves and spurs, have more of the dry in them; while those which are softer, such as blood, phlegm, fat, suet, marrow, brain and the spinal cord, have more of the wet in them than the dry. And, furthermore, the degree by which the driest of all parts in the human body exceeds the skin in hardness is the same as that by which the wettest part falls short of it. Our argument would seem now, in a way, to touch upon matters of the very greatest value, teaching us both that man has the best mixture, not only of animals, but also of all other bodies, and at the same time that, of the parts of the human being, the skin on the inside of the hand is, in the precise sense, free of all excesses. So let us again focus our argument on this point and consider: which human being has the best mixture of all? We should place this human being in the middle with respect to all existent objects, and even more so in relation to human beings and other animals; and using him as a kind of standard and yardstick, should call all others hot, cold, dry or wet by comparison with him. Many indicators must point in the same direction here. For indeed, when one conducts the examination in relation to all existent objects, it must be apparent that such a person is in the middle, and this must be the case even more so in relation to human beings and animals. Now, the common indicators that apply to all existent objects have been stated already; those applicable to animal species, on the other hand, are assessed on the basis of the perfection of the activity appropriate to each.

Chunk 5

Αὖθις δ’ ἀπὸ τῶν ἐνεργειῶν οἱ μὲν ὅτι καὶ αὐξάνονται καὶ πλειόνων ἢ κατὰ τὴν ἀναλογίαν τοῦ σώματος ὀρέγονταί τε καὶ κρατοῦσιν ἐδεσμάτων, ἰσχυρὰν ἐν τοῖς παισὶν εἶναί φασι τὴν θερμασίαν· οἱ δὲ τὸ μὲν αὐξάνεσθαι διὰ τὴν ὑγρότητα μᾶλλον ἢ τὴν τοῦ θερμοῦ ῥώμην ὑπάρχειν αὐτοῖς φασι, ταῖς μέντοι πέψεσιν οὐχ ὅπως πλεονεκτεῖν ἀλλὰ καὶ πολὺ τῶν ἀκμαζόντων ἀπολείπεσθαι. ἐμέτους τε γὰρ ἀπέπτων αὐτοῖς γίγνεσθαι σιτίων καὶ διαχωρήσεις ὑγρῶν καὶ τραχέων καὶ ἀχυμώτων. εἰ δ’ ὀρέγονται πλειόνων, οὐδὲν εἶναι τοῦτό φασι πρὸς τὴν ῥώμην τοῦ θερμοῦ. πρῶτον μὲν γὰρ οὐδὲ πλεονεξίᾳ θερμότητος ὀρέγεσθαι τὰ ζῷα, τοὐναντίον [δ’] ἅπαν ἀποψυχομένων τῶν ὀρεκτικῶν μορίων· ἔπειτα δὲ διότι μὴ μόνον εἰς θρέψιν ἀλλὰ καὶ εἰς αὔξησιν αὐτοῖς ἡ τροφὴ διοικεῖται, διὰ τοῦτο πλειόνων ἐδεσμάτων προσδεῖσθαι. κατὰ μέντοι τὰς ἄλλας ἁπάσας ἐνεργείας καὶ πάνυ σαφῶς ἀπολείπεσθαι τοὺς παῖδας τῶν ἀκμαζόντων. οὔτε γὰρ βαδίζειν οὔτε θεῖν οὔτε βαστάζειν οὔθ’ ὅλως οὐδὲν τῶν πρακτικῶν ἐνεργειῶν ὁμοίως ἐπιτελεῖν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὰς αἰσθήσεις καὶ τὰς νοήσεις ἐν τοῖς ἀκμάζουσί φασιν εἰς ἄκρον ἥκειν ἀρετῆς. ὅλως δὲ τὸ μὲν ἀτελὲς ἔτι, τὸ δ’ ἤδη τέλειον εἶναι ζῷον. ἐν δὲ τοῖς τελείοις εὔλογόν φασι τὸ πρακτικώτατόν τε καὶ ἀρχικώτατον τῶν στοιχείων ἐπικρατεῖν. ἀλλὰ καὶ τοὺς ὕπνους πλείστους μὲν ἐν τοῖς παισὶν ἰδεῖν ἔστι γιγνομένους, ἐλαχίστους δ’ ἐν τοῖς ἀκμάζουσι.

In turn, from the functions, there are those who say the heat is strong in children because they grow and desire and have power over more foods than are in proportion to the body, while there are those who say growth is due more to the wetness than to the strength of the heat in them, and that not only do they not predominate in the concoctions in this matter, but also they are consistently lacking compared to those in their prime. For vomits of unconcocted foods occur in them as do excretions, since the foods themselves are watery, rough, and have not as yet been changed in flavor. If, however, they desire more food, they say this is not related to the strength of the heat. For appetite in animals is not primarily due to the preponderance of hotness; on the contrary; it is generally when the appetitive parts are chilled. Therefore, because the nourishment in children provides not only for nutrition but also for growth, there is need for more food due to this. And further of course, in all the other functions, it is very clear that children are deficient compared to those in their prime. For they don’t walk, run, and carry, nor in general perform any of the practical functions similarly. They also say the perceptive and intellectual functions come to a peak of excellence in those in their prime. In general terms, the one (the child) is still an incomplete animal while the other (adult in the prime of life) is already complete. They say in those who have come to completion, it is reasonable for the most effective and most dominant of the elements to prevail. But it is also seen that more sleep occurs in children and the least in those in their prime.

Again, on the basis of the activities, too, the former group claim that because children grow and have a greater appetite and greater capacity to dominate food than is proportionate with the size of their bodies, the heat is strong in children; the latter, that their growth is due to wetness rather than to the strength of the hot, and that their coction, so far from being superior to that of those in their prime, is actually far inferior. For, as they point out, children frequently vomit undigested food, as well as excreting fluids that are both rough and lacking in moisture. As for their greater appetite, they deny that this is related to the strength of the hot, on the grounds, first of all, that it is not predominance of hotness that causes appetite in animals, but that on the contrary, [it occurs] when the parts involving appetite are cooling down; and secondly, that the reason for their need for more food is that the nourishment is employed not just for nutrition but also for growth. And in all other activities, [the argument continues,] children are very clearly inferior to people in their prime. They do not perform any of the practical activities, such as walking, running and lifting, at an equal level; and as for perception and intelligence, these, too, they argue, reach their peak of excellence when one is in one’s prime. In general terms, then, [they say,] the child is an incomplete animal whereas the person in his prime is a complete one. And it is reasonable to suppose, they say, that it is in complete animals that the most active and powerful of the elements dominates. Sleep, too, they say, can be seen to be at its most frequent in childhood, and the reverse in the prime.

Chunk 6

πάντες δ’ ὑμένες ἤδη ξηρότεροι δέρματος, ὥσπερ γε καὶ αἱ περὶ τὸν ἐγκέφαλόν τε καὶ τὸν νωτιαῖον μήνιγγες· ὑμένες γὰρ δὴ καὶ αἵδε. καὶ μὲν δὴ καὶ σύνδεσμοι πάντες, εἰς ὅσον σκληρότεροι δέρματος, εἰς τοσοῦτον καὶ ξηρότεροι. καὶ οἱ τένοντες δέ, κἂν εἰ τῶν συνδέσμων εἰσὶ μαλακώτεροι, δέρματος γοῦν ἐναργῶς ἤδη σκληρότεροι. χόνδροι δὲ μετὰ τοὺς συνδέσμους εἰσὶ καὶ τι μέσον ἀμφοῖν σῶμα· καλοῦσι δ’ αὐτὸ νευροχονδρώδη σύνδεσμον ἔνιοι τῶν ἀνατομικῶν. ἔστι δὲ τοῦτο σύνδεσμος σκληρὸς καὶ χονδρώδης. ὀστοῦν δὲ τὸ πάντων σκληρότατον, ὧν καλύπτει τὸ δέρμα, καὶ τῶν ἐξεχόντων αὐτοῦ ξηρότατον μὲν ἡ θρίξ, ἐφεξῆς δὲ κέρας, εἶτ’ ὄνυχές τε καὶ ὁπλαὶ καὶ πλῆκτρα καὶ ῥάμφη καὶ ὅσα τοιαῦτα καθ’ ἕκαστον τῶν ἀλόγων ζῴων ἐστὶ μόρια. Τῶν δὲ χυμῶν ὁ μὲν χρηστότατός τε καὶ οἰκειότατός ἐστι τὸ αἷμα. τούτου δ’ οἷον ὑπόστασίς τις καὶ ἰλὺς ἡ μέλαινα χολὴ· ταῦτ’ ἄρα καὶ ψυχροτέρα τ’ ἐστὶ καὶ παχυτέρα τοῦ αἵματος· ἡ δέ γε ξανθὴ θερμοτέρα μακρῷ, ψυχρότατον δὲ καὶ ὑγρότατον ἁπάντων τῶν ἐν τῷ ζῴῳ τὸ φλέγμα. κριτήριον δὲ καὶ τῆς τούτου διαγνώσεως ἡ ἁφή, καθάπερ καὶ Ἱπποκράτης ἐν τῷ Περὶ φύσεως ἀνθρώπου πεποίηται. ἀλλ’ ὅτι μὲν ψυχρόν, ἡ ἁφὴ μόνη διαγιγνώσκει· τὸ δ’ ὅτι καὶ ὑγρόν, ἁφή θ’ ἅμα καὶ ὄψις καὶ λογισμός, ἁφὴ μὲν καὶ ὄψις, ὅτι τοιοῦτον ἑκατέρᾳ φαίνεται, λογισμὸς δὲ διορισάμενος, ὡς οὐ πλήθει θερμότητος, ἀλλ’ ὑγρότητι συμφύτῳ τοιοῦτον ἐγένετο.

All membranes are already drier than skin, just as in fact the meninges around the brain and spinal cord also are, for these are certainly membranes. And furthermore, all ligaments are drier to the degree they are harder than skin, while the tendons, even though they are softer than the ligaments, are in fact already clearly harder than skin. Cartilages are after the ligaments, and there is a body midway between both, which some anatomists call “neurocartilaginous ligament.” This is a hard and cartilaginous ligament. Bone, however, is the hardest of all those [structures] the skin conceals. Of those that project from the skin, hair is the driest, then next horns, then nails, hooves, spurs, and beaks, and such things as are parts in each of the nonrational animals. Of the humors, the most useful and most familiar is the blood. The black bile is a kind of sediment and dregs of this. This, then, is colder and thicker than the blood. The yellow bile is in fact much hotter, while the phlegm is the coldest and wettest of all the humors in the animal. Touch is judge of the recognition of this, just as Hippocrates has also established [by reason] in the work, On the Nature of Man. But that it is cold, the touch alone recognizes, whereas that it is wet, touch along with sight and reason recognize; touch and sight because it seems so to each of them, while reason since it distinguishes that it is not by the abundance of hotness, but by innate wetness, that it has become like this.

All membranes, certainly, are drier than skin, as are the meninges in the region of the brain and the spinal cord; for these are membranes too. All ligaments, too, are drier than skin, to the same degree that they are harder. The tendons, though softer than the ligaments, are manifestly harder than the skin. Cartilage comes after ligament; and there is a kind of body which is midway between the two, and is referred to by some anatomical writers as ‘nerve-gristly ligament’. This is a hard, gristly kind of ligament. Bone is the hardest of all things hidden beneath the skin; of those that protrude from it, the driest is hair, followed by horn, then nails, hooves, spurs, bills, and all such parts that occur in the various non-rational animals. Of the fluids, the best and most appropriate is blood. Black bile is a kind of sediment or dreg of this; therefore it is both colder and thicker than blood. Yellow bile is much hotter, while the coldest and wettest of all animal fluids is phlegm. Here, too, the instrument of assessment by which we recognize this is the sense of touch, as was also posited by Hippocrates in his The Nature of the Human Being. But while the fact that it is cold is recognized by the sense of touch alone, the fact that it is also wet is recognized by the sense of touch in conjunction with that of sight and with the reasoning-faculty: the senses of touch and sight, in that it appears cold to both of them, the reasoning-faculty, in that it must make the distinction that it is not through a large quantity of hotness but through its connate wetness that it has become so.

Chunk 7

δέδεικται γὰρ ἔμπροσθεν, ὡς τῶν γηρασκόντων ἅπαντα ξηραίνεται τὰ μόρια. γίγνεται δὲ πολλοῖς ὀστρακῶδες τὸ δέρμα πλέον ἢ δεῖ ξηρανθέν. ἐν τοιούτῳ δ’ οὐδὲν φύεσθαι δύναται, καθότι καὶ διὰ τῶν ἔμπροσθεν ὡμολόγηται. καὶ γὰρ δὴ καὶ τῶν χειρῶν τὰ ἔνδον ὥσπερ γε καὶ τὰ κάτω τῶν ποδῶν ἄτριχα καὶ ψιλὰ ξηρότητί τε καὶ πυκνότητι τοῦ κατ’ αὐτὰ τένοντος, ὃς ὑποτέτακται τῷ δέρματι. ὅσοις δ’ εἰς τέλος ξηρότητος οὐκ ἀφικνεῖται τὸ δέρμα τῆς κεφαλῆς, ἄρρωστοι τούτοις γίγνονται καὶ λευκαὶ πάντως αἱ τρίχες, ἃς ὀνομάζουσιν οἱ ἄνθρωποι πολιάς, ἄρρωστοι μὲν ἐνδείᾳ τῆς οἰκείας τροφῆς, λευκαὶ δέ, διότι καὶ τὸ τρέφον αὐτὰς τοιοῦτον οἷον εὐρώς τις φλέγματος ἐν χρόνῳ διασαπέντος. ὅταν γὰρ ὁ μὲν πόρος ἔτι μένῃ, τὸ περίττωμα δ’ ὀλίγον ᾖ καὶ γλίσχρον, ἀρρώστως δ’ ὑπὸ τῆς θερμασίας ὠθῆται πρόσω, πάσχει τι παραπλήσιον ἐν τῷδε σηπεδόνι καὶ δὴ φαλακροῦνται μὲν μᾶλλον τὸ βρέγμα γηρῶντες οἱ ἄνθρωποι, πολιοῦνται δὲ τοὺς κροτάφους μᾶλλον, ὅτι τὸ μὲν ξηρότατόν ἐστι τῶν μορίων ἁπάντων τῆς κεφαλῆς· ἐπὶ γὰρ ὀστῷ τὸ δέρμα ταύτῃ ψιλῷ· οἱ κρόταφοι δ’ ὑγρότεροι· μύες γὰρ ἐνταῦθ’ εἰσὶν ὑπὸ τῷ δέρματι μεγάλοι, σαρκώδης δὲ πᾶς μῦς, ἡ δὲ σὰρξ ὀστοῦ καὶ δέρματος ὑγροτέρα. VI. Ἀκριβῶς δὲ χρὴ προσέχειν τῷ λεγομένῳ τὸν νοῦν, ὅπως μὴ λάθωμεν ἡμᾶς αὐτοὺς παρακούσαντές τι καὶ σφαλέντες, οἷα δὴ πολλοὶ τῶν πάνυ δοκούντων ἀρίστων ἰατρῶν εἶναι σφάλλονται, εἴ τίς ἐστι φαλακρός, εὐθὺς τοῦτον οἰόμενοι ξηρὰν ἔχειν ἅπαντος τοῦ σώματος τὴν κρᾶσιν.

For it was shown previously that all the parts of those who are aging are dried out. In many the skin becomes shell-like being dried out more than it should be. In such skin, nothing is able to grow, as was also agreed upon through those things [said] previously. Furthermore also, the skin on the palms of the hands, just as that on the soles of the feet is hairless and bare due to dryness and thickness of the tendon in these which lies under the skin. The hair in those in whom the skin of the head does not reach complete dryness becomes weak and altogether white, which men term gray-haired; weakness is due to lack of proper nourishment, while whiteness is because what does nourish them is as if decayed, some phlegm coming to putrefaction over time. For whenever the pore still remains, while the superfluity is small in amount and viscous, and is pushed onward weakly by the heat, it suffers something similar in the putrefaction, and certainly men growing old become bald more in respect of the bregma, whereas they become white-haired more at the temples. The former is the driest of all the parts of the head, for the skin there is attached to bare bone. The temples, however, are wetter, for the muscles under the skin are large here, while the whole muscle is fleshy, the flesh being wetter than bone and skin. It is necessary to direct attention precisely to what is being said, so we do not unwittingly hear something carelessly and erroneously, as certainly many of the seemingly very best doctors do when they fall into the error of thinking if a person is bald, he automatically has a dry krasis of the whole body.

(For it was shown previously that all parts of the body become drier in the process of aging.) And in many persons the skin becomes very hard through having been dried more than it should be; nothing can grow in such skin, as has been established in the above discussion. The palms of the hands, too, and the soles of the feet are hairless and bald, because of the dryness and thickness of the tendon in those parts, which is located immediately below the skin. Hair in people whose scalp does not reach perfect dryness becomes weak and wholly white, and is called ‘silver’; it becomes weak because of an insufficiency of the hair’s proper nourishment, and white because even what does nourish it is somewhat like a mould, the phlegm having undergone putrefaction over time. For when the channel still remains, but the residue is small in quantity and sticky, and is pushed outwards only weakly by the heat, it undergoes something similar to putrefaction. And men as they grow older tend to go bald more about the top, front part of the head, but to go silver around the temples: the former part is the driest in the whole head, since the skin there is in contact with bare bone, while the temples are wetter, since there are large muscles below the skin in that place. (All muscles are fleshy, and flesh is wetter than bone and skin.) The point under discussion requires precise attention. There is a danger here that we may without noticing it fall into a certain misinterpretation and into a kind of mistake made by many of those who have a great reputation for excellence as doctors, namely to think that someone who is bald must automatically have a dry mixture of the body as a whole.

Chunk 8

καὶ οἷς μὲν ἡ ῥὶς ὀξεῖα καὶ γρυπή, ξηροί, σιμῆς δ’ οὔσης ὑγροί· κατὰ ταὐτὰ δὲ καὶ περὶ τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν τε καὶ τῶν κροτάφων ἁπάντων τε τῶν ἄλλων μορίων. οἷς δ’ ἀνώμαλος ἡ κρᾶσις καὶ οὐχ ἡ αὐτὴ πάντων τῶν μερῶν, ἄτοπον ἐπὶ τούτων ἐξ ἑνὸς μορίου φύσεως ὑπὲρ ἁπάντων ἀποφαίνεσθαι. τοιοῦτον δέ τι τοὺς πλείστους αὐτῶν ἠπάτησεν, οὐχ ὑπὲρ τῶν ἀνθρώπων μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ περὶ τῶν ἄλλων ζῴων ἀποφήνασθαι τολμήσαντας ὑπὲρ ὅλης τῆς κράσεως ἐκ μόνων τῶν κατὰ τὸ δέρμα γνωρισμάτων. οὔτε γάρ, εἰ σκληρὸν τὸ δέρμα, ξηρὸν ἐξ ἀνάγκης τὸ ζῷον, ἀλλ’ ἐγχωρεῖ τὸ δέρμα μόνον, οὔτ’ εἰ μέλαν οὔτ’ εἰ δασύ. κατὰ δὲ τὸν αὐτὸν τρόπον οὐδ’ εἰ μαλακὸν ἢ λευκὸν ἢ ψιλὸν τριχῶν, ὑγρὸν ἐξ ἀνάγκης ὅλον τὸ ζῷον. ἀλλ’ εἰ μὲν ὁμαλῶς κέκραται σύμπαν, εὔλογόν ἐστιν, οἷόνπερ τὸ δέρμα, τοιοῦτον εἶναι καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἕκαστον μορίων, εἰ δ’ ἀνωμάλως, οὐκέτι. τῶν γοῦν ὀστρέων ὑγρότατον μὲν ὅλον τὸ σῶμα, ξηρότατον δὲ τὸ δέρμα· τὸ γὰρ δὴ ὄστρακον αὐτοῖς οἷόνπερ ἡμῖν τὸ δέρμα. καὶ ἡ προσηγορία δ’ ἐντεῦθεν, ὀστρακοδέρμων ἁπάντων τῶν τοιούτων ζῴων ὀνομασθέντων ἐκ τοῦ τὸ δέρμα παραπλήσιον ἔχειν ὀστράκῳ. καὶ τὰ μαλακόστρακα δέ, καθάπερ ἀστακοί τε καὶ κάραβοι καὶ καρκῖνοι, ξηρὸν μὲν ἔχει τὸ δέρμα, τὴν δ’ ἄλλην ἅπασαν κρᾶσιν ὑγράν.

And those in whom the nose is sharp or hooked are dry, while those in whom it is snub are wet. It is the same too regarding the eyes and the temples and all the other parts. On the other hand, in those in whom the krasis is non-uniform, and is not the same in all the parts, it is unwonted to make a statement about all the parts from the nature of one part. Such a thing deceives the majority of them, not only about humans, but also about the other animals, when they boldly make a statement about the whole krasis from the signs pertaining to the skin alone. For the animal is not necessarily dry, if the skin is hard; it is possible for the skin alone [to be hard]. [The same applies] if it is black or hirsute. In the same way, if the skin is soft or pale or devoid of hair, the whole animal is not necessarily wet. But if the whole has been compounded uniformly, it is reasonable for each of the other parts, like the skin, to be so too. On the other hand, if the krasis is non-uniform this is no longer the case. Anyway, the whole body of oysters is very wet while the skin is very dry, for certainly the shell in them is like the skin in us. And the appellation of ostrakoderms here, when applied to all such animals, comes from the skin in them being similar to an ostrakon (earthenware vessel). And soft-shelled animals like smooth lobsters, crayfish, and crabs have dry skin but all the other krasis is wet.

Then, too, a sharp, hooked nose will be dry, and those with a snub nose wet; and similarly as regards the eyes, the temples and all the other parts. But in cases where the mixture is uneven, and thus not the same in each part, it is incongruous to make assertions about all the parts on the basis of the nature of one. Such is the point on which most of them have been deceived: they presume to make assertions – not just in the case of humans, but with other animals too – about the whole mixture, solely on the basis of the indicators in the skin. And yet it does not necessarily follow from hardness of skin that the animal as a whole will be hard, for that attribute may apply to the skin only; and the same is true with blackness, or hairiness. On exactly the same principle, it does not necessarily follow from softness, whiteness or lack of hair of the skin that the animal as a whole will be wet. If the whole consists of an even mixture, then it is reasonable that each of the other parts will be similar to the skin; if of an uneven mixture, then that is no longer the case. Take the case of oysters: their bodies are extremely wet, their skin extremely dry (their shell, after all, is what corresponds to skin in us). Indeed, this is the origin of the appellation: all such animals are termed ‘testaceans’ [ostrakoderma] because their skin is like a ceramic pot. Crustaceans, too, such as smooth lobsters, crayfish and crabs, have dry skin but otherwise a wet overall mixture.

Chunk 9

καὶ τὸ τῆς Μηδείας δὲ φάρμακον τοιοῦτον ἦν. πάντα γοῦν ἀνάπτεται προσβαλλούσης θερμασίας οἷς ἂν ἐπαλειφθῇ. σκευάζεται δ’ ἐκεῖνο διά τε θείου καὶ τῆς ὑγρᾶς ἀσφάλτου. καὶ μὲν δὴ καὶ ὡς θαῦμά τις ἐδείκνυ· ἀποσβεννὺς λύχνον αὖθις ἧπτε τοίχῳ προσφέρων· ἕτερος δὲ λίθῳ προσέφερεν· ἐτεθείωτο δ’ ἄρα καὶ ὁ τοῖχος καὶ ὁ λίθος. καὶ ὡς ἐγνώσθη τοῦτο, θαυμαστὸν οὐκέτ’ ἦν τὸ γιγνόμενον. Πάντ’ οὖν ταῦτα τὰ φάρμακα θερμὰ μὲν οὔπω τελέως ἐστίν, ἐπιτηδειότατα μέντοι πρὸς τὸ γενέσθαι θερμὰ καὶ διὰ τοῦτο δυνάμει θερμὰ λέγεται. περὶ μὲν δὴ τούτων οὐδὲν ἄπορον, ἀλλ’ οὐδὲ διὰ τί πινόμενος μὲν ὁ οἶνος ἱκανῶς θερμαίνει τὸ σῶμα, κατὰ δὲ τοῦ δέρματος ἐπιτιθέμενος οὐ θερμαίνει. δέδεικται γὰρ ὀλίγῳ πρότερον οὐχ ἁπλῶς ὡς θερμὸν φάρμακον ἀλλ’ ὡς οἰκεία τροφὴ θερμαίνων τὸ ζῷον. ὡς γὰρ αἱ τοῦ πυρὸς ἐπιτήδειοι τροφαὶ τὸ πῦρ αὔξουσιν, οὕτω καὶ τῶν φύσει θερμῶν σωμάτων ὅ τί περ ἂν οἰκεία τε καὶ σύμφυτος ὑπάρχῃ τροφὴ ῥώσει τε πάντως αὐτὰ καὶ τὴν ἔμφυτον αὐξήσει θερμασίαν. καὶ τοῦτο μὲν ἁπάσης τροφῆς κοινόν· οἴνῳ δ’ ἴδιον ἐξαίρετον ὑπάρχει τὸ τάχος τῆς μεταβολῆς ὡς δᾳδὶ καὶ θρυαλλίδι καὶ στυπείῳ καὶ πίττῃ. καὶ δὴ καὶ τῆς εἰκόνος ἐχόμενοι τοῦ πυρὸς ἀναμνησθῶμεν αὖθις ξύλων ὑγρῶν, ἃ τροφὴ μέν ἐστι καὶ αὐτὰ τοῦ πυρός, ἀλλ’ οὐκ εὐθὺς οὐδ’ ἐκ τοῦ παραχρῆμα, καὶ διὰ τοῦτ’ ἐπιβληθέντα [πολλάκις] τῷ πυρὶ κατακρύπτει τε τὴν φλόγα καὶ μάλιστ’ ἂν ἀσθενὴς ὑπάρχῃ καὶ σμικρά, καὶ κίνδυνον ἐπάγει φθορᾶς.

And the medication of Medea was of this sort. At all events, anything that it is smeared over is kindled to flame when heat is applied to it. And that is prepared from brimstone and the liquid of asphalt. Furthermore also, what is shown as a mystery is an extinguished lamp that is set alight again when brought together with a wall, and another when brought together with a stone. The wall and the stone were in fact covered with brimstone. And when this was known, the occurrence was no longer surprising. Thus all these medications are not yet completely hot, but are of course very suited to becoming hot, and because of this are said to be hot potentially. There is certainly nothing strange about these, but nor is there as to why wine heats the body significantly when drunk, but doesn’t heat when applied to the skin. It has been shown a little earlier that it is not simply as a hot medication but as a suitable nutriment that it heats the organism, for as the nutriments suitable for the fire increase the fire, in the same way too for the bodies hot in nature, what is a suitable and natural nutriment will strengthen these throughout and increase the innate heat. And this is common to every nutriment. The rapidity of the change is peculiarly remarkable to wine, as to pinewood, plantain, flax, and pitch. Furthermore, since they have a likeness to the fire, we shall call to mind again wood that is wet which is itself a nutriment for the fire, but not immediately or straightaway, and because of this, when it is thrown on the fire, on many occasions it conceals the flame and particularly should that be weak and small, there is danger of it leading to extinction.

Medea’s drug was something of this sort, too. Anything into which [this] has been rubbed catches fire when heat is brought into contact with it. That, in fact, is prepared from a mixture of brimstone and wet asphalt. Indeed, this used to be shown off as a magic trick: one would extinguish a lamp and then light it again by bringing it into contact with a wall, or sometimes with a stone. The wall or stone had of course been covered in brimstone; and once this was realized the thing no longer appeared amazing. So, all these drugs are not yet completely hot, but have to a high degree a tendency to become hot, and because of that are referred to as ‘hot in capacity’. There is no difficulty, then, about these; but neither should there be any difficulty as to why wine heats the body significantly when drunk, but not when placed on the skin. As was shown a little earlier, wine heats the animal not simply as a hot drug, but also as a nourishment proper [to the animal]. Just as those things with the tendency to be the nourishment of fire increase a fire, similarly whatever is a proper, connate nourishment of naturally hot bodies will definitely strengthen them and increase their innate heat. This feature in itself is common to all nourishment; what is specific and unusual in wine is the speed of the change, as with pinewood, plantain, flax and pitch. Furthermore, keeping still to the analogy of fire, let us recall to mind the case of wet wood: this too is a nourishment for fire, but not immediately nor instantaneously; and because of this, wet wood when placed on a fire will often obscure the flame, especially when it is small and weak, and even risk destroying it.

Chunk 10

ἂν γὰρ οὕτω σμικρά τινα περὶ ἡμᾶς ᾖ πάθη διὰ παντός, ὡς μηδεμίαν αἰσθητὴν καὶ σαφῆ βλάβην ἐνεργείας ἐργάζεσθαι μηδεμιᾶς, εὐκαταφρόνητα δήπουθέν ἐστι καὶ τῷ μηδ’ εἶναι φάσκοντι τὰ τοιαῦτα συγχωρητέον. οὕτως οὖν ἔχει κἀπὶ τῶν τρεφόντων ὀλίγου δεῖν ἁπάντων. ἐργάζεται μὲν γάρ τι καὶ αὐτὰ περὶ τὸ σῶμα τῶν ἀνθρώπων, ἀλλ’ οὐκ αἰσθητὸν οὐδὲ σαφὲς εἰσάπαξ. ἡ μέντοι πολυχρόνιος αὐτῶν προσφορὰ μεγάλως ἀλλοιοῖ καὶ μεταβάλλει σαφῶς ἤδη τὰ σώματα. ἔνια μέν γε καὶ κατὰ τὴν πρώτην χρῆσιν εὐθὺς ἐναργῶς ἐνδείκνυται τὴν ἀλλοίωσιν, οἷον καὶ ἡ θριδακίνη τοὺς μὲν ἐγκαιομένους τὴν γαστέρα σαφῶς ἐμψύχουσά τε καὶ ἀδίψους ἐργαζομένη, τοὺς δὲ κατεψυγμένους ἐναργῶς βλάπτουσα. συντελεῖ δ’ οὐ σμικρὰ καὶ τοῖς ὕπνοις οὐ κατ’ ἄλλον τινὰ λόγον, ἀλλ’ ἢ ὅτι ψυχρά τ’ ἐστὶ καὶ ὑγρὰ τὴν κρᾶσιν, ἀλλ’ οὕτω ψυχρὰ καὶ ὑγρὰ πρὸς ἄνθρωπόν τε καὶ τἆλλ’ ὅσα τρέφειν πέφυκεν ὡς καὶ τὰ ξύλα τὰ χλωρὰ πρὸς τὸ πῦρ. ὥστ’ εὐλόγως ἄμφω τοῖς τοιούτοις ἐδέσμασιν ὑπάρχει τὸ θ’ ὡς φαρμάκοις διατιθέναι τὰ σώμαθ’ ἡμῶν καὶ τὸ τρέφειν, παρ’ ὅλον μὲν τὸν χρόνον τῆς πέψεως ὡς φαρμάκοις· ἡνίκα δ’ ἤδη τρέφει τε καὶ τελέως ὁμοιοῦται, τότ’ οὐκέτ’ οὐδὲν ἡμᾶς ἀντιδρῶντα τὴν ἔμφυτον αὔξει θερμασίαν, ὡς καὶ πρόσθεν εἴρηται. κοινὸν γὰρ δὴ τοῦτο τῶν τρεφόντων ἁπάντων ἐστὶ καὶ οὐ χρὴ θαυμάζειν, εἴ τι, πρὶν μὲν ἐξομοιοῦσθαι καὶ τρέφειν, ἔτι πεττόμενον ἔψυξεν, ἐξομοιωθὲν δὲ καὶ θρέψαν ἐθέρμηνε, μεμνημένους ἀεὶ τοῦ τῶν χλωρῶν ξύλων παραδείγματος.

For in this way, there would be certain small affections involving us continuously, such as to produce no perceptible and clear harm to any functions, and are, I presume, to be ignored. As a result one must agree with someone who says such things don’t exist. It is the same in the case of all nutriments apart from a few. That is to say, these also produce something involving the body of humans, but not something perceptible or clear once and for all. Nevertheless, the administration of these over a long period of time greatly alters and already clearly changes the bodies. Some, in fact, at the first use immediately and clearly display the change; an example is lettuce, which in some cases clearly cools the stomach when it is burning and produces lack of thirst, while in others who are cooled, it is obviously injurious. And it has no small effect on those who are sleeping, and not for any other reason than that it is cold and wet in krasis, but in this way being cold and wet toward a person and the other things it naturally nourishes, as green wood nourishes a fire. Consequently, both are to be expected with such foods; to be applied to our bodies as medications and to nourish through the whole time of concoction as medications, but when it has already nourished and is completely assimilated, at that time it no longer acts against us in any way, but increases the innate heat, as was also said previously. For this is a common feature of all those things that are nourishing, and it is not necessarily surprising, if something, before it is assimilated and nourishing, while still being concocted, has cooled, whereas when it has been assimilated and has nourished, it has heated, bearing in mind always the example of green wood.

For if we are constantly suffering from certain ailments that are so tiny that they produce no clear, perceptible harm to our activities, then, surely, these may rightly be ignored, and we may agree with the person who denies also that they exist. It is so too with almost all things that nourish. These also have some effect on the human body, but this effect is not at once clear nor perceptible. Their use over a long period, however, brings about great alteration and obvious actual change in our bodies. Some of them, indeed, show manifest indications of alteration even at the first use; lettuce, for example, clearly cools those who are suffering from a burning stomach, and removes their thirst; and it does manifest harm to those who have been cooled down. It also has a considerable effect on sleep, for no other reason than that it has a cold, wet mixture and it is as cold and wet in relation to man, and to all the other [animals] which it nourishes, as green wood is to fire. It thus seems reasonable that these kinds of food have both properties: to affect our bodies as drugs, and to nourish them. The former effect continues throughout the entire period of coction; but, once they are already nourishing us and are completely assimilated, at that point they have no further opposite effect on us, and increase the innate heat, as was also stated earlier. This, indeed, is the common feature of all things that nourish; and one should not think it surprising that something, before it is assimilated and nourishes, while still undergoing coction, has a cooling effect, but that once it has been completely assimilated and has started nourishing, it heats, provided that we always bear in mind the parallel of green wood.

