On Mixtures 1.1

That the bodies of animals consist of a mixture of hot, cold, dry and wet and that there is not an equal portion of all these in the mixture, has been adequately demonstrated by men of ancient times, the best of both philosophers and doctors; and the appropriate things have been stated by us, too, in a separate work, in which we investigated the elements according to Hippocrates. Now, however, I shall do what follows on from that, namely go through in this work the discovery of all the distinct types of mixtures: how many there are, and of what kind, as one separates them by genus and species; and I shall take my starting point from an explanation of the terms used. When they say that bodies consist of a mixture of hot, cold, dry and wet, they state that one should understand [these terms as applying to] things which are so in the extreme, in other words to the elements themselves: air, ﬁre, water and earth; but when they say that an animal or plant is hot, cold, dry or wet, it is not so in the same way. For, [the argument continues], no animal can be hot in the extreme, like ﬁre, nor wet in the extreme, like water; and likewise, no animal can be cold or dry in their ultimate manifestations. Rather, such appellations derive from that which predominates in the mixture: we call that body wet in which the portion of wetness is greater, and that dry, in which the portion of dryness is greater; and similarly, that hot in which the hot predominates over the cold, and that cold in which the cold predominates over the hot. This, then, is the way in which the terms are used. (On Mixtures 1.1 = Kühn I 509–10, tr. Singer and van der Eijk 2019)

Ὅτι μὲν ἐκ θερμοῦ καὶ ψυχροῦ καὶ ξηροῦ καὶ ὑγροῦ τὰ τῶν ζῴων σώματα κέκραται καὶ ὡς οὐκ ἴση πάντων ἐστὶν ἐν τῇ κράσει μοῖρα, παλαιοῖς ἀνδράσιν ἱκανῶς ἀποδέδεικται φιλοσόφων τε καὶ ἰατρῶν τοῖς ἀρίστοις· εἴρηται δὲ καὶ πρὸς ἡμῶν ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν τὰ εἰκότα δι’ ἑτέρου γράμματος, ἐν ᾦ περὶ τῶν καθ’ Ἱπποκράτην στοιχείων ἐσκοπούμεθα. νυνὶ δ’, ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἐφεξῆς ἐκείνῳ, ἁπάσας ἐξευρεῖν τῶν κράσεων τὰς διαφοράς, ὁπόσαι τ’ εἰσὶ καὶ ὁποῖαι κατ’ εἴδη τε καὶ γένη διαιρουμένοις, ἐν τῷδε τῷ γράμματι δίειμι τὴν ἀρχὴν ἀπὸ τῆς τῶν ὀνομάτων ἐξηγήσεως ποιησάμενος. ἐπειδὰν μὲν γὰρ ἐκ θερμοῦ καὶ ψυχροῦ καὶ ξηροῦ καὶ ὑγροῦ κεκρᾶσθαι λέγωσι τὰ σώματα, τῶν ἄκρως τοιούτων ἀκούειν φασὶ χρῆναι, τουτέστι τῶν στοιχείων αὐτῶν, ἀέρος καὶ πυρὸς καὶ ὕδατος καὶ γῆς· ἐπειδὰν δὲ ζῷον ἢ φυτὸν ἤτοι θερμὸν ἢ ψυχρὸν ἢ ξηρὸν ἢ ὑγρὸν εἶναι λέγωσιν, οὐκέθ’ ὡσαύτως. οὐδὲ γὰρ δύνασθαι ζῷον οὐδὲν οὔτ’ ἄκρως θερμὸν ὑπάρχειν ὡς πῦρ οὔτ’ ἄκρως ὑγρὸν ὡς ὕδωρ. ὡσαύτως δ’ οὐδὲ ψυχρὸν ἢ ξηρὸν ἐσχάτως, ἀλλ’ ἀπὸ τοῦ πλεονεκτοῦντος ἐν τῇ κράσει γίγνεσθαι τὰς προσηγορίας, ὑγρὸν μὲν καλούντων ἡμῶν, ἐν ᾧ πλείων ὑγρότητός ἐστι μοῖρα, ξηρὸν δ’, ἐν ᾧ ξηρότητος· οὕτω δὲ καὶ θερμὸν μέν, ἐν ᾧ τὸ θερμὸν τοῦ ψυχροῦ πλεονεκτεῖ, ψυχρὸν δ’, ἐν ᾧ τὸ ψυχρὸν τοῦ θερμοῦ. αὕτη μὲν ἡ τῶν ὀνομάτων χρῆσις. (Helmreich ed.)

On Composition of Drugs According to Kinds

Περὶ μὲν τῆς τῶν ἁπλῶν φαρμάκων δυνάμεως εἴρηται δι’ ἑτέρας πραγματείας ὅτι χρὴ γινώσκειν ἑκάστου τὴν δύναμιν, οὐ κατὰ γένος μόνον, ὡς ἔγραψάν τινες, ἤτοι θερμαίνειν ἢ ψύχειν ἢ ξηραίνειν ἢ ὑγραίνειν εἰπόντες, ἀλλὰ διωρισμένως τε καὶ διηρθρωμένως, ἐκ τίνος ἐστὶ τάξεως, ὡς ἡμεῖς ἐδηλώσαμεν. ἔνια μὲν γὰρ φάρμακα παντάπασιν ἀμυδρῶς ἐργάζεται τῶν εἰρημένων ἕκαστον, ἔνια δὲ σαφῶς, ἔνια δὲ ἰσχυρῶς, ὥσπερ ἄλλα τελέως. οὔκουν αὐταρκὲς ἐπίστασθαι θερμαίνειν ἢ ψύχειν τόδε τὸ φάρμακον, ἀλλὰ καὶ μέχρι πόσου θερμαίνει καὶ ψύχει προσδιορίσασθαι χρή. θερμαίνουσι γὰρ αἱ ῥητίναι πᾶσαι καὶ τοῦτο κοινὸν αὐταῖς, ἀλλὰ τὸ μᾶλλον καὶ ἧττον οὐκ ὀλίγον ἐν τῇ θερμότητι κέκτηνται. θερμαίνουσι δὲ καὶ ὀποὶ πολλοὶ, διαφέροντες ἀλλήλων οὐ σμικρὰν διαφορὰν ἐν τῷ μᾶλλόν τε καὶ ἧττον. εἰ γὰρ παραβάλλοις ὀπὸν πάνακος τῷ Κυρηναίῳ καὶ Μηδικῷ, δόξει σοι τοῦτο μηδὲν ὡς πρὸς ἐκείνους εἶναι. καὶ τί δεῖ πόῤῥω τὸν λόγον ἀπάγειν, αὐτῶν οἷς ὁσημέραι προσφερόμεθα τῆς διαφορᾶς ἀναμνῆσαι δυναμένους; ἄνηθον γοῦν καὶ πήγανον καὶ κρόμμυον θερμαίνοντα πάντα πολὺ διενήνοχεν ἀλλήλων, ὥστε καὶ κατὰ τὰς θεραπείας τῷ μὲν ἱκανῶς ἐψυγμένῳ μορίῳ τὸ θερμαῖνον ἱκανῶς προσοίσομεν φάρμακον, τῷ δὲ βραχὺ τοῦ κατὰ φύσιν ἐξηλλαγμένῳ τὸ μετρίως θερμαῖνον, ὥσπερ γε καὶ τῷ πάνυ κατεψυγμένῳ τὸ σφοδρότατα θερμαῖνον. εἰκότως οὖν ἡμεῖς ἐποιησάμεθα τέσσαρας τάξεις ἐν τοῖς θερμαίνουσι, διορισάμενοι τῶν ἐπ’ ὀλίγον θερμαινόντων τά τε σαφῶς τοῦτο δρῶντα καὶ τὰ πάνυ θερμαίνοντα καὶ τὰ σφόδρα μετὰ τοῦ καίειν. [ed. Kühn, XIII 367.10–369.1]

Concerning the power of simple drugs, it has already been said in another treatise that one must know the power of each not only according to its kind (as some have written), stating that it is to heat or to cool or to dry or to moisten, but also in a definite and particular fashion, stating what rank it belongs to, as we have made clear. For some drugs accomplish each of the aforementioned powers in a manner that is very obscure, while others do so clearly; others do so vehemently, just as others do so absolutely. It is not then sufficient to know that a given drug is heating or cooling, but one must also specify besides the extent to which it is heating and cooling. For all pine-resins are heating, and this is common to them, but they vary greatly in their heating to a greater or lesser degree. Many juices, too, are heating, but differ greatly from one another in that they heat to a greater or lesser degree. For if you were to compare the juice of panacea with Cyrenaic or Medic juice, it will seem to you that it is nothing in comparison to them. And what need is there for me to divert my argument further, when I am able to remark the difference among those things by which we daily feed ourselves? For at any rate dill, rue, and onion, though they are all heating, different greatly from one another, so that also in medical treatments we will administer to that part which is quite chilled a drug that heats to an ample degree, and for one that departs a little from what is natural we will administer a drug that heats to a moderate degree, just as we will administer to that which is very greatly chilled the one that heats the most intensely. We have fittingly therefore established four ranks among things that are heating, distinguishing from those which heat to a small degree those which do so clearly, and then those which heat to a very great degree, and those which do so intensely along with burning.  (James’ translation)
